# Breastfeeding: Some Strategies Used to Market Infant Formula May Discourage Breastfeeding

**Report:** GAO-06-282 | **Published:** 2006-02-01 | **Source:** [U.S. Government Accountability Office](https://www.gao.gov/products/gao-06-282)

---

**United States Government Accountability Office**
# GAO Report to Congressional Addressees February 2006 BREASTFEEDING Some Strategies Used to Market Infant Formula May Discourage Breastfeeding; State Contracts Should Better Protect against Misuse of WIC Name

**GAO-06-282**

## Contents

**Letter** 1

**Appendix I** **Briefing Slides** 6

**Appendix II** **Advertising Data** 36

**Appendix III** **Literature Review** 37

**Appendix IV** **Studies in Literature Review** 39

**Abbreviations**

CDC Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

FNS Food and Nutrition Service
NIS National Immunization Survey
USDA United States Department of Agriculture
WIC Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women,
Infants, and Children

This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the
United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further
permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or
other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to
reproduce this material separately.

**Page i** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**United States Government Accountability Office**
**Washington, DC 20548**

February 8, 2006

The Honorable Robert Bennett

Chairman

The Honorable Herb Kohl

Ranking Minority Member
Subcommittee on Agriculture, Rural Development,
and Related Agencies
Committee on Appropriations
United States Senate

The Honorable Henry Bonilla
Chairman

The Honorable Rosa L. DeLauro

Ranking Minority Member
Subcommittee on Agriculture, Rural Development,
Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies
Committee on Appropriations
United States House of Representatives

The Honorable Tom Harkin

Ranking Minority Member
Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry
United States Senate

Millions of U.S. mothers and infants each year forgo the health benefits of
breastfeeding and rely on infant formula. Infants who are breastfed are
less likely to develop infectious diseases and chronic health problems,
such as diabetes and asthma, while breastfeeding mothers are less likely to
develop certain types of cancer. Recognizing the health benefits of
breastfeeding for infants and mothers, the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services’ Healthy People 2010 campaign has recommended that
more U.S. infants be breastfed and that babies be breastfed for longer
periods of time. According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA),
the U.S. would save a minimum of $3.6 billion in health care costs and
indirect costs, such as parents’ lost wages, if breastfeeding increased to
meet these Healthy People goals.

Breastfeeding rates are particularly low among infants who participate in
the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants and
Children (WIC). WIC is administered by the USDA’s Food and Nutrition

**Page 1** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

Service (FNS) in cooperation with state and local agencies. The program
provides free food and infant formula to improve the health and nutritional
well-being of low-income women, infants, and young children. Nearly half
of infants born in the U.S. receive benefits through WIC.

Although formula manufacturers agree that breastfeeding is best, they
market infant formula as an alternative for mothers who do not

exclusively breastfeed. A congressional committee asked us to review the
potential impact of infant formula marketing on breastfeeding rates,
especially for infants in the WIC program. 1 We answered the following
questions: 1) What are the estimated breastfeeding rates for infants in the
general population and for infants on WIC, and how do these rates
compare to recommended breastfeeding rates? 2) How is infant formula
marketed to women in general and to women on WIC in particular? 3)
What is known about the impact of infant formula marketing on the
breastfeeding rates of women in the general population and women on
WIC?

On December 14, 2005, we briefed interested congressional staff on the
results of our analysis. This report formally conveys information provided
during that briefing. In summary, we reported the following findings:

WIC and non-WIC breastfeeding rates fell short of most national goals,
but rates were substantially lower for WIC infants.

Infant formula marketing targets non-WIC mothers and also reaches
WIC mothers. Some of these marketing efforts use the trademarked
WIC acronym in promotional materials. Although FNS requires states
to restrict this practice in their WIC contracts, most states do not.

- A majority of studies we reviewed that examine giving free formula
samples to mothers at hospital discharge found lower breastfeeding
rates among both WIC and non-WIC mothers. However, little is known
about the impact of most types of marketing.

In order to better protect the WIC acronym and logo from being
inappropriately used in infant formula advertisements, we are
recommending that the Secretary of Agriculture educate all states about

1 The Senate Committee on Appropriations asked in the 2005 Agriculture, Rural
Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies appropriations report
( _Senate Report 108-340_ ) that we conduct this study.

**Page 2** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

FNS’ policy restricting the use of the WIC acronym and logo and ensure
that all state formula contracts include provisions restricting the use of
these trademarks in infant formula advertisements.

We used the following methodologies to develop our findings. To identify
breastfeeding rates, we analyzed 2004 data from the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention’s (CDC) National Immunization Survey (NIS) and
compared the breastfeeding rates of WIC and non-WIC infants to the
Healthy People 2010 breastfeeding goals. We also interviewed officials
regarding survey methodology, and we determined that the survey and
analysis were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this briefing. To
examine how infant formula is marketed to women in general and women
on WIC, we analyzed data from market research company TNS Media
Intelligence on television, radio, print, and outdoor infant formula
advertisements between 1999 and 2004. To assess the reliability of the
data, we talked with company representatives about data quality control
procedures and reviewed relevant documentation. We determined the data
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this briefing. To supplement
the data, we surveyed state WIC directors and conducted interviews with
women on WIC and with officials from infant formula companies and the
National WIC Association. We also corresponded with FNS and reviewed
state infant formula contracts, FNS policies, and infant formula
advertisements. To assess the impact of infant formula marketing on
breastfeeding rates of non-WIC and WIC participants, we reviewed U.S.
studies published between January 1980 and July 2005 on the impact of
infant formula marketing on breastfeeding rates. We examined each
study’s research methodology, including its sampling frame and analytic
techniques, to determine whether the results should be included in our
findings. Only two of the studies we reviewed included mostly WIC
participants, and these studies had small samples. For additional
information on our study review, please see appendixes III and IV. We
conducted our work from June 2005 to November 2005 in accordance with

generally accepted government auditing standards.

This study focused on the marketing of infant formula and its impact on
breastfeeding rates. We did not assess the impact of other factors that may
affect breastfeeding rates, such as cultural factors and whether women
work outside of the home, because this was beyond the scope of our work.
In addition, available data did not allow us to assess whether there is a
causal relationship between trends in infant formula marketing and
historical breastfeeding rates in the U.S.

**Page 3** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

We provided a draft of this report to officials of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture for review and comment and incorporated their comments
where appropriate. On January 6, 2006, the officials provided us with oral
comments. They stated they agreed with our recommendation that the
Secretary of Agriculture educate all states about FNS’ policy restricting the
use of the WIC acronym and logo and ensure that all state formula
contracts include provisions restricting the use of these trademarks in
infant formula advertisements.

The officials noted that it may be necessary to include language in the
state contracts allowing for fair use of the WIC name and acronym, as
allowed by federal trademark law. They also explained that such use may
serve a helpful purpose by informing health care providers and WIC
participants of the infant formulas and medical foods that are available
through WIC. We noted that our recommendation language was
sufficiently broad to allow USDA to include language it considers
appropriate in protecting the WIC trademark, including allowances for fair

use.

Officials also noted that the report did not consider the impact of
employment factors on breastfeeding rates and that such factors may be
particularly important for WIC participants, many of whom are employed
outside the home. We agreed and explained that assessing the importance
of such factors was beyond the scope of this report.

We are sending copies of this report to relevant congressional committees
and other interested parties and will make copies available to others upon
request. In addition, this report will be available at no charge on GAO’s
[Web site at www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about](http://www.gao.gov/)
this report, please contact me at (415) 904-2272 or bellisd@gao.gov.
Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public

**Page 4** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. Patrick di Battista
(Assistant Director), Melissa Emrey-Arras (Co-Analyst-in-Charge), Marissa
Jones (Co-Analyst-in-Charge), Rachael Chamberlin, Vivian Horn, Jim
Lager, Jean McSween, Karen O’Conor, Dan Schwimer, and Jay Smale also
made significant contributions to this report.

David D. Bellis

Director, Education, Workforce,
and Income Security Issues

**Page 5** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Page 6** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Page 7** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Page 8** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Page 9** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Appendix I: Briefing Slides**

|Healthy People 2010 Breastfeeding Goals|Col2|
|---|---|
|**Any breastfeeding**|At birth: 75% of infants<br>6 months: 50% of infants<br>12 months: 25% of<br>infants|
|**Exclusive**<br>**breastfeeding**|3 months: 60% ofinfants<br>6 months: 25% of infants|

**Page 10** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Appendix I: Briefing Slides**

**Page 11** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Appendix I: Briefing Slides**

**Page 12** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Appendix I: Briefing Slides**

**Page 13** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Appendix I: Briefing Slides**

**Page 14** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Appendix I: Briefing Slides**

**Page 15** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Appendix I: Briefing Slides**

**Page 16** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Appendix I: Briefing Slides**

**Page 17** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Appendix I: Briefing Slides**

**Page 18** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Appendix I: Briefing Slides**

**Page 19** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Appendix I: Briefing Slides**

**Page 20** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Appendix I: Briefing Slides**

**Page 21** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Appendix I: Briefing Slides**

**Page 22** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Appendix I: Briefing Slides**

**Page 23** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Appendix I: Briefing Slides**

**Page 24** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Appendix I: Briefing Slides**

**Page 25** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Appendix I: Briefing Slides**

**Page 26** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Appendix I: Briefing Slides**

**Page 27** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Appendix I: Briefing Slides**

**Page 28** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Appendix I: Briefing Slides**

**Page 29** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Appendix I: Briefing Slides**

**Page 30** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Appendix I: Briefing Slides**

**Page 31** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Appendix I: Briefing Slides**

**Page 32** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Appendix I: Briefing Slides**

**Page 33** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Appendix I: Briefing Slides**

**Page 34** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Appendix I: Briefing Slides**

**Page 35** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

## Appendix II: Advertising Data Appendix II: Advertising Data

To understand how infant formula is advertised through the mass media in
the U.S., GAO purchased and analyzed data from TNS Media Intelligence
on infant formula advertising between 1999 and 2004 in major U.S.
markets. These data identified infant formula advertisements in the

following media outlets:

Television

                    - network TV,

                    - spot TV,

                    - cable TV, and

                    - syndicated TV

Print

                    - magazines,

                    - Hispanic magazines,

                    - business to business publications,

                    - national newspapers,

                    - Hispanic newspapers, and

                    - other newspapers

Radio

                    - national spot radio
(Data was only available on radio advertising expenditures, not the
number of ads aired.)

TNS Media Intelligence also searched for infant formula advertisements on
outdoor signs but did not find any during this time period.

To assess the reliability of the data, we talked with company
representatives about data quality control procedures and reviewed
relevant documentation. We determined the data were sufficiently reliable
for the purposes of estimating trends in marketing by formula companies.

**Page 36** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

## Appendix III: Literature Review Appendix III: Literature Review

To identify research that evaluates the impact of infant formula marketing
on breastfeeding rates among the general population and WIC participants
in particular, we searched relevant databases from January 1980 through
July 2005 using Dialog, including Agricola, Biosis, and CAB. We also
consulted with USDA, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the
National WIC Association, infant formula companies, and other experts in
the field. In addition, we identified studies through citations in previously
identified studies, as well as through online journals and search engines.

In order to focus on evaluation of the impact of infant formula marketing,
we identified studies that met the following criteria:

                    - The document is an original research study or an analysis of research
data evaluating the impact of infant formula marketing on
breastfeeding rates among U.S. women in general or WIC participants
specifically.

                    The document has been published in a refereed medium (for example,
a journal article, book or book chapter, or USDA-issued report).

                    The document’s publication date is 1980 or later.

                    - All of the research described in the document was conducted in the

United States.

                    - The document is in English.

Some studies were excluded because the research was not conducted in

the United States or because they did not otherwise meet our criteria. For
example, we excluded one study of the impact of hospital discharge packs
on breastfeeding rates because the study had been conducted in Canada.

We identified 17 studies meeting our review criteria, and we conducted
detailed reviews of each study’s research methodology, including its
research design, sampling frame, selection of measures, data quality,
limitations, and analytic techniques. 1 We excluded 5 studies due to
methodological limitations and retained 12 for analysis (listed in
appendix IV).

1 The studies used different measures of breastfeeding, such as one week or one month,
and defined exclusive breastfeeding in different ways, ranging from consumption of
nothing but breast milk to consumption of no other milk or formula.

**Page 37** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

**Appendix III: Literature Review**

Eleven of the remaining 12 studies examined the impact on breastfeeding
of giving new mothers free infant formula samples in hospital discharge
packages. 2 Only 2 of these studies included mostly WIC participants. One
study examined the impact on breastfeeding of formula samples
distributed to pregnant women in doctors’ offices.

2 Some studies compared receipt of formula discharge packs to receipt of no packs, while
others compared them to receipt of breastfeeding promotion packs or other infant supply
packs. Two of the studies were supported by infant formula companies.

**Page 38** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

#### Studies of Infant Formula Discharge Packs Included in Our Review

Bliss, Mary Campbell, Joy Wilkie, Curt Acredolo, Susan Berman, and
Kathleen Phillips Tebb. “The Effect of Discharge Pack Formula and Breast
Pumps on Breastfeeding Duration and Choice of Infant Feeding Method.”
_Birth_ 24:2 (June 1997): 90-97. (This study was supported by infant formula
manufacturer Mead Johnson.)

Caulfield, Laura E., Susan M. Gross, Margaret E. Bentley, Yvonne Bronner,
Lisa Kessler, Joan Jensen, Benita Weathers and David M. Paige. “WICBased Interventions to Promote Breastfeeding Among African-American
Women in Baltimore: Effects on Breastfeeding Initiation and
Continuation.” _Journal of Human Lactation_ 14:1 (1998): 15-22. (Study
focused exclusively on WIC participants.)

Dungy, Claibourne I., Mary E. Losch, Daniel Russell, Paul Romitti, and Lois
B. Dusdieker. “Hospital Infant Formula Discharge Packages: Do They
Affect the Duration of Breast-feeding?” _Archives of Pediatrics &_
_Adolescent Medicine_ 151 (July 1997): 724-729.

Evans, Cynthia J., Nancy B. Lyons, and Marcia G. Killien. “The Effect of
Infant Formula Samples on Breastfeeding Practice.” _Journal of Obstetric,_
_Gynecologic, and Neonatal Nursing_ (September/October 1986): 401-405.

Feinstein, Joel M., Jay E. Berkelhamer, Mary Ellen Gruszka, Cynthia A.
Wong, and Ann E. Carey. “Factors Related to Early Termination of Breastfeeding in an Urban Population.” _Pediatrics_ 78:2 (August 1986): 210-215.

Frank, Deborah A., Stephen J. Wirtz, James R. Sorenson, and Timothy
Heeren. “Commercial Discharge Packs and Breast-Feeding Counseling:
Effects on Infant-Feeding Practices in a Randomized Trial.” _Pediatrics_
80:6 (December 1987): 845-854.

Neifert, Marianne, Jane Gray, Nancy Gary, and Bonnie Camp. “Effect of
Two Types of Hospital Feeding Gift Packs on Duration of Breast-feeding
Among Adolescent Mothers.” _Journal of Adolescent Health Care_ 9:5
(1988): 411-413.

Ryan, Alan S., Jeffrey L. Wysong, Gilbert A. Martinez, and Stephen D.
Simon. “Duration of Breast-feeding Patterns Established in the Hospital.”
_Clinical Pediatrics_ 29:2 (February 1990): 99-107. (This study was
conducted by infant formula manufacturer Ross Laboratories.)

Romero-Gwynn, Eunice. “Breast-feeding Pattern Among Indochinese
Immigrants in Northern California.” _American Journal of Diseases of_

**Page 39** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

#### Study of Prenatal Infant Formula Advertising Included in Our Review

**(130489)**

**Appendix IV: Studies in Literature Review**

_Children_ 143 (July 1989): 804-808. (Study included mostly WIC
participants.)

Snell, B.J., Marie Krantz, Rebecca Keeton, Karen Delgado, and Carol
Peckham. “The Association of Formula Samples Given at Hospital
Discharge with the Early Duration of Breastfeeding.” _Journal of Human_
_Lactation_ 8:2 (1992): 67-72.

Wright, Anne, Sydney Rice, and Susan Wells. “Changing Hospital Practices
to Increase the Duration of Breastfeeding.” _Pediatrics_ 97:5 (May 1996):
669-675.

Howard, Cynthia, Fred Howard, Ruth Lawrence, Elena Andresen,
Elisabeth DeBlieck, and Michael Weitzman. “Office Prenatal Formula
Advertising and Its Effect on Breast-Feeding Patterns.” _Obstetrics &_
_Gynecology_ 95:2 (February 2000).

**Page 40** **GAO-06-282 Breastfeeding**

#### GAO’s Mission

The Government Accountability Office, the audit, evaluation and
investigative arm of Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting its
constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and
accountability of the federal government for the American people. GAO
examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and policies;
and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance to help
Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding decisions. GAO’s
commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of
accountability, integrity, and reliability.

#### Public Affairs

[Paul Anderson, Managing Director, AndersonP1@gao.gov (202) 512-4800](mailto:AndersonP1@gao.gov)
U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7149
Washington, D.C. 20548

**PRINTED ON** **RECYCLED PAPER**