# Managing for Results: Enhancing Agency Use of Performance Information for Management Decision Making

**Report:** GAO-05-927 | **Published:** 2005-09-01 | **Source:** [U.S. Government Accountability Office](https://www.gao.gov/products/gao-05-927)

---

#### GAO

**United States Government Accountability Office**
Report to the Chairman, Subcommittee
on Government Management, Finance
and Accountability, Committee on
Government Reform, House of
Representatives

#### September 2005 MANAGING FOR RESULTS Enhancing Agency Use of Performance Information for Management Decision Making

# a

**GAO-05-927**

**September 2005**

MANAGING FOR RESULTS

**Enhancing Agency Use of Performance**
**Information for Management Decision**
**Making**

**What GAO Found**

Agencies can use performance information to make various types of
management decisions to improve programs and results. Agencies can also
implement a number of practices that can enhance or facilitate the use of
performance information. GAO identified four broad types of management
decisions for which federal managers can use performance information and
five different types of practices that can contribute to greater use of
performance information. (See figure.)

**Practices That Can Enhance or Facilitate the Use of Performance Information for**
**Management Decision Making**

The five federal agencies that GAO examined for this report provide
examples of how agencies can use performance information for key
management decisions and practices that can enhance or facilitate such use.
While agencies face different management conditions and challenges and
operate under different authorities, the general uses and practices
highlighted in this report could be adapted by other agencies. Helpful next
steps would be for agency experiences in using performance information to
be more widely shared; and, for agencies to be encouraged to adapt the
practices to their unique situations.

**United States Government Accountability Office**

###### Contents

Letter 1

Results in Brief 3

Background 5
Agencies Can Use Performance Information to Manage for
Results 7

Management Practices Can Enhance the Use of Performance
Information 18

Conclusions 33

Agency Comments 33

Appendixes

**Appendix I:** **Scope and Methodology** 35

**Appendix II:** **GAO Contact and Staff Acknowledgments** 40

Bibliography 41

Related GAO Products 42

Table Table 1: Background Information on Agencies Selected to Illustrate
Performance Information Uses and Practices 36

Figures Figure 1: Practices That Can Enhance or Facilitate the Use of
Performance Information for Management Decision
Making 3
Figure 2: Example of Using Performance Information to Manage
for Results 4

Figure 3: The Percentage of Federal Managers Who Reported
Using Information Obtained from Performance Measures
to a Great or Very Great Extent for Various Management
Activities Has Not Increased Significantly Since 1997 6
Figure 4: Uses of Performance Information 8
Figure 5: Practices That Can Enhance or Facilitate the Use of
Performance Information for Management Decision
Making 18
Figure 6: SBA Data Validation Table 25
Figure 7: NOAA Quad Chart Template 29
Figure 8: NOAA Display Board Template 30

**Page i** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

**Contents**

Figure 9: FAA Scorecard for Runway Incursions 32

**Abbreviations**

BIC Business Information Center

COO Chief Operating Officer
DOC Department of Commerce
DOL Department of Labor
DOT Department of Transportation
EBSA Employee Benefits Security Administration
EMS Enforcement Management System
ETA Employment and Training Administration
FAA Federal Aviation Administration

FARS Fatality Analysis Reporting System
FFMP Flash Flood Monitoring and Prediction Program
GPRA Government Performance and Results Act

GS General Schedule

NBLP National Business Learning Partnership
NHTSA National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
NOAA National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
NWS National Weather Service

OMB Office of Management and Budget
OPA Office of Participant Assistance
OSI Organizational Success Increase
PEP Performance Enhancement Project
SBA Small Business Administration

SES Senior Executive Service

VA Department of Veterans Affairs
VHA Veterans Health Administration

WFO Weather Forecast Office

WIA Workforce Investment Act

This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the
United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further
permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or
other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to
reproduce this material separately.

**Page ii** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

## A

**United States Government Accountability Office**
**Washington, D.C. 20548**

September 9, 2005 **Leter**

The Honorable Todd Platts

Chairman, Subcommittee on Government
Management, Finance and Accountability
Committee on Government Reform

House of Representatives

Dear Mr. Chairman:

The federal government is in a period of profound transition and faces an
array of challenges and opportunities to enhance performance, ensure
accountability, and position the nation for the future. These 21 [st] century
challenges include the nation’s large, long-term fiscal imbalance, evolving
national and homeland security threats, increasing global interdependence,
the global shift to market-oriented knowledge-based economies, an aging
and more diverse population, and rapid advances in science and
technology. In the face of these pressures, it is vital to maximize the
performance of federal agencies in achieving their long-term goals. The
Government Performance and Results Act of 1993 (GPRA) [1] planning and
reporting requirements can provide the essential information needed to
assess federal agencies’ performance, hold agencies accountable for
achieving results, and help the baseline review of federal programs,
operating functions, and activities needed to respond to the nation’s longterm structural fiscal imbalance. GPRA requires executive agencies to
develop strategic plans, prepare annual performance plans, measure
progress toward the achievement of the goals in the annual performance
plans, and report annually on their progress in program performance
reports.

For planning and performance measurement to be effective, federal
managers need to use performance information to identify performance
problems and look for solutions, develop approaches that improve results,
and make other important management decisions. A 2004 GAO report that
reviewed the effectiveness of GPRA found that while the percentage of
federal managers who report having performance measures for their
programs has increased over time, their use of performance information in

1 GPRA, Pub. L. No. 103-62 (Aug. 3, 1993), was enacted to help resolve the long-standing
management problems that undermined the federal government’s efficiency and
effectiveness and provide greater accountability for results.

**Page 1** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

making key management decisions, such as adopting new program
approaches or changing work processes, has not. [2] Federal agencies also
appear to differ considerably in the extent to which they use performance
information to manage.

Identifying practices associated with the increased use of performance
information could be helpful to federal agencies seeking to better use
performance information to inform their decisions and ultimately achieve
results. Although performance information could also be helpful for
external purposes, such as congressional decision making, transparency,
and public accountability, this report focuses on use of performance
information by federal agency managers.

This report responds to your request that we identify (1) how federal
agencies can use performance information to make management decisions
and (2) practices that can facilitate the use of performance information.

To address the objectives, we reviewed relevant literature, including
previous GAO reports, spoke to experts in using performance information,
and held group discussions with federal program managers. We also
interviewed individuals within five federal agencies and reviewed
documentation to illustrate in greater detail how program managers have
used performance information to make decisions and specific agency
practices that facilitated those uses. We selected the five agencies—the
Departments of Commerce, Labor, Transportation, and Veterans Affairs,
and the Small Business Administration—on the basis of a number of

factors, including a relatively high agency score on our 2000 GPRA survey
regarding the extent to which agency managers reported using
performance information, and relatively good agency marks in the
September 2004 Executive Branch Management Scorecard (President’s
Management Agenda). We also considered information obtained from
interviews with experts, and diversity in terms of program type and size. It
should be noted that we did not attempt to identify all agencies and
programs that could have illustrated these uses and practices. In addition,
we reviewed existing relevant information regarding the quality of
performance information where available but did not systematically assess
the quality of the performance information used in the examples we cite.
Finally, for most of the examples, we describe how performance

2 GAO, _Results-Oriented Government: GPRA Has Established a Solid Foundation for_
_Achieving Greater Results,_ [GAO-04-38 (Washington, D.C.: Mar. 10, 2004).](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-04-38)

**Page 2** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

information was used to make decisions, but we did not attempt to verify
that the use ultimately resulted in improved outcomes. (See appendix I for
a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology and for further
information on the five agencies.) We conducted our work in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards from September
2004 through August 2005.

Results in Brief Agencies can use performance information to make various types of
management decisions to improve programs and results. Agencies can also
implement a number of practices that can enhance or facilitate the use of
performance information. We identified four broad types of management
decisions for which federal managers can use performance information
and five different types of practices that can contribute to greater use of
performance information. (See fig. 1.)

**Figure 1: Practices That Can Enhance or Facilitate the Use of Performance**
**Information for Management Decision Making**

**Improved results**

Source: GAO.

**Page 3** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

The five federal agencies that GAO examined for this report provide
examples of how agencies can use performance information for key
management decisions and practices that can enhance or facilitate such
use. While agencies face different management conditions and challenges
and operate under different authorities, the general uses and practices
highlighted in this report could be adapted by other agencies. Helpful next
steps would be for agency experiences in using performance information to
be more widely shared; and, for agencies to be encouraged to adapt the
practices to their unique situations. In figure 2 we describe how an agency
employed several practices to use performance information to make
management decisions.

**Figure 2: Example of Using Performance Information to Manage for Results**

Over the past 20 years, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) has used performance information to identify,
develop, and share effective programs and strategies that increase safety belt usage, and as a result has contributed to an
increase in seat belt usage nationally from 11 percent in 1985 to 80 percent in 2004. With a mission to save lives and prevent
injuries, NHTSA’s evaluation office analyzes information provided by the annual National Occupant Protection Usage Survey, in
which safety belt use is directly observed at locations across the country, and the Fatality Analysis Reporting System, a database
of all fatal crashes in the United States. From its analysis, NHTSA estimated that safety belts are 50 percent effective at preventing
fatalities of front seat occupants in crashes in which these motorists would otherwise die. In an effort to increase usage nationally,
NHTSA conducted several small studies in the 1980s and 1990s on how to best increase safety belt usage. NHTSA’s research
showed that educating the public on the safety benefits of seat belts was not very effective and that laws requiring seat belt use,
while somewhat effective, only increased usage to about 40 percent. One of NHTSA’s studies, Buckle Up America, revealed that
active enforcement combined with media campaigns highlighting enforcement, as opposed to safety, could increase seat belt
usage incrementally by 4 to 8 percent a year.

However, NHTSA officials said these studies alone did not influence states to change their expenditures with regard to safety belt
use. Building on the findings of these studies, NHTSA then developed and piloted the Click It or Ticket safety belt campaign, which
included both a paid media enforcement message along with periods of active police enforcement of safety belt use. The
campaign, co-sponsored by the Airbag and Safety Belt Safety Campaign of the National Safety Council [a], was piloted in three
states. Doubledigit increases in safety belt use were seen in all three states, demonstrating the effectiveness of this strategy in
changing motorists’ safety belt use behavior. Ultimately, performance information documenting the program’s effectiveness in
multiple states began to persuade officials from other states to adopt the program. By 2003, 43 states, the District of Columbia,
and Puerto Rico had participated in the twice yearly national Click It or Ticket campaign. As a result, the national average for safety
belt use is up to 80 percent. NHTSA is now focusing on identifying and developing strategies to target specific segments of the
population found to have the lowest safety belt usage rates, such as drivers of pickup trucks.

Source: GAO.

a The National Safety Council is a nonprofit, nongovernmental, international public service organization
dedicated to protecting life and promoting health.

We provided a draft of this report to the Secretaries of Commerce, Labor,
Transportation, and Veterans Affairs, and the Administrator of the Small

**Page 4** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

Business Administration for their review and comment. Technical

comments provided were incorporated, where appropriate, in the report.

Background GPRA helped create a governmentwide focus on results by establishing a
statutory framework for performance management and accountability,
with the necessary infrastructure to generate meaningful performance
information. GPRA introduced planning and reporting requirements that
seek to shift the focus of federal management and decision making from a
preoccupation with the number of program tasks or activities completed or
services provided to a more direct consideration of the results of programs.
The Act was intended to improve federal program effectiveness,
accountability, and service delivery. GPRA requires federal agencies to
develop strategic plans with long-term, outcome-oriented goals and
objectives, annual goals linked to the long-term goals, and annual reports
on the results achieved. Agencies are required to measure progress toward
the achievement of the goals in annual performance plans and report
annually on their progress in program performance reports.

As we reported in our 10-year retrospective report on the effectiveness of
GPRA, the Act’s requirements have laid a solid foundation of resultsoriented agency planning, measurement, and reporting that has begun to
address the purposes of GPRA. [3] Performance planning and measurement
have slowly yet increasingly become a part of agencies’ cultures.
According to three government-wide, random sample surveys of federal
managers conducted by us in 1997, 2000, and 2003, managers reported
having significantly more of the types of performance measures called for
by GPRA, particularly outcome-oriented performance measures, in 2003
than in 1997, when GPRA went into effect governmentwide.

The benefit of collecting performance information is only fully realized
when this information is actually used by managers to make decisions
oriented toward improving results. While our surveys found that managers
reported having more performance measures in 2003 than in 1997, the data
showed that the use of performance information for program management
activities did not increase significantly from 1997 levels.  In our survey, we
asked managers about their use of performance information for specific
purposes, such as “setting program priorities”, “allocating resources”, or

3 GAO-04-38.

**Page 5** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

“adopting new program approaches.” As shown in figure 3, the majority of
managers who expressed an opinion reported using performance
information for these uses to a great or very great extent in 2003. While the
reported use of performance information for these uses to a great or very
great extent fluctuated somewhat between 1997 and 2003, the extent of use
in 2003 was not significantly different from 1997 levels for any category of
use except “adopting new program approaches or changing work
processes”, where use actually decreased.

**Figure 3: The Percentage of Federal Managers Who Reported Using Information Obtained from Performance Measures to a**
**Great or Very Great Extent for Various Management Activities Has Not Increased Significantly Since 1997**

**Percent**

**100**

**90**

**80**

**70**

**60**

**50**

**40**

**30**

**20**

**10**

**0**

|66|62|Col3|66|61|Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||62<br>56<br>59<br>53<br>60|62<br>56<br>59<br>53<br>60||53<br>53<br>60<br>60<br>51<br>56<br>51<br>61|53<br>53<br>60<br>60<br>51<br>56<br>51<br>61|53<br>53<br>60<br>60<br>51<br>56<br>51<br>61|53<br>53<br>60<br>60<br>51<br>56<br>51<br>61|53<br>53<br>60<br>60<br>51<br>56<br>51<br>61|
||62<br>56<br>59<br>53<br>60||||||||
||||||||||
||||||||||

|62|Col2|60|
|---|---|---|
||||
||||

|61|Col2|60|
|---|---|---|
||||
||||

**Setting program** **Allocating** **Adopting new**
**priorities** **resources** **program approaches**
**or changing**
**work processes** [a]

**Key management activities**

1997

2000

2003

Source: GAO.

**Setting individual**
**job expectations**
**for my staff**

**Rewarding staff I**
**manage or supervise**

a There was a statistically significant difference between the 1997 and 2003 surveys.

**Page 6** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

Agencies Can Use
Performance
Information to Manage
for Results

From our 2000 survey, [4] we also know that use of performance information
has varied widely among agencies. For example, while 56 percent of
managers overall reported using performance information when setting
program priorities in 2000, the percentage of managers within specific
agencies reporting this use to a great or very great extent ranged from 26
percent to 64 percent. Similarly, wide variation among agencies was seen
in managers’ reported use of performance information for other types of
management decisions. For example, the reported use of performance
information to a great or very great extent in agencies ranged from 24 to 66
percent when allocating resources, from 25 to 64 percent when adopting
new program approaches or changing work processes, and from 16 to 66
percent when setting individual job expectations.

Federal agencies can use performance information to make various types
of management decisions to improve programs and results. We have
previously reported that leading organizations that have progressed toward
results-oriented management use performance information as a basis for
decision making. [5] The full benefit of collecting performance information is
realized only when managers actually use it to manage. From our review of
the literature, agency documents and interviews with experts and agency
officials, we identified four categories of management decisions for which
federal agency managers can use performance information. (See fig. 4). [6]
Managers can use performance information to identify problems in existing
programs, to try to identify the causes of problems, and/or to develop
corrective actions. They can also use program performance information to
develop strategies, plan and budget, identify priorities, and make resource

4 GAO, _Managing for Results: Federal Managers’ Views on Key Management Issues Vary_
_Widely Across Agencies,_ [GAO-01-592 (Washington, D.C.: May 25, 2001). The 2000 survey](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-01-592)
provided the most current data on specific agencies, while the 2003 survey provided
governmentwide data.

5 GAO, _Executive Guide: Effectively Implementing the Government Performance and_
_Results Act,_ [GAO/GGD-96-118 (Washington, D.C.: June 1996); and GAO,](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO/GGD-96-118) _Results-Oriented_
_Cultures: Creating a Clear Linkage between Individual Performance and Organizational_
_Success,_ [GAO-03-488 (Washington, D.C.: Mar. 14, 2003).](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-03-488)

6 The four use categories we identified through our independent analysis are similar to the
four types of uses identified in _How Federal Programs Use Outcome Information:_
_Opportunities for Federal Managers_, by Harry Hatry, Elaine Morley, Shelli Rossman and
Joseph Wholey, published by the IBM Endowment for the Business of Government in May
2003. Furthermore, these categories are consistent with, but not identical to, the types of
uses captured in questions for our surveys of federal agency managers described earlier.

**Page 7** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

allocation decisions to affect programs in the future. Agency managers can
also use performance information to reward individuals or organizations
who meet or exceed expectations. Finally, managers can use performance
information to identify more effective approaches to program
implementation and share those approaches more widely across the

agency.

**Figure 4: Uses of Performance Information**

**Improved results**

Performance Information
Can Be Used to Identify
Problems in Programs and
Take Corrective Action

Source: GAO.

Agencies can use performance information to identify problems or
weaknesses in programs, to try to identify factors causing the problems,
and to modify a service or process to try to address problems. We have
reported that leading organizations that have progressed toward resultsoriented management have used performance information to identify gaps
in performance, improve organizational processes, and improve their
performance. [7] We found several examples where federal program
managers used performance data to identify problems and corrective
actions at the agencies we examined.

Officials in the Office of Participant Assistance (OPA) at the Employee
Benefits Security Administration (EBSA) in the Department of Labor
(DOL) told us that when data for a performance measure of customer
satisfaction indicated a problem, they changed a process to try to improve

7 [GAO-04-38, GAO-01-592, and GAO/GGD-96-118.](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-04-38)

**Page 8** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

performance. One of EBSA’s functions is to provide information and
assistance for individuals covered by private retirement and health and
welfare plans, plan sponsors, and members of the employee benefits
community. EBSA has contracted with an outside organization since 2003
to collect data through a specialized survey on customer satisfaction with
EBSA services.  Data indicated that customers whose cases were referred

to the enforcement side of EBSA were reporting lower satisfaction rates.
An analysis of data for specific survey questions identified the need for
improved communication. Investigating an inquiry or complaint could
sometimes take up to 2 years, and a customer might not receive any
information during that time. As a result of the performance data, EBSA
changed a standard operating procedure in January 2005 so that customers
would be kept informed about the status of their open inquiries or
complaints. Under the new procedure, when an inquiry is referred to the
enforcement staff for investigation, the OPA benefits advisor informs the
inquirer about the referral and sets realistic expectations for future contact
by an investigator. Investigative staff are to make initial contact with the
customer no later than 30 days following receipt of the referral and
maintain contact with the inquirer on a quarterly basis until the matter is
resolved. Managers plan to continue to monitor customer satisfaction to
see whether the changes lead to improved performance.

Through the Performance Enhancement Project (PEP), the Office of
Workforce Investment in DOL has used performance information to
identify the technical assistance needs of state and local employment and
training programs and has then provided targeted assistance to try to
improve performance. The PEP project, which began in October 2002, has
provided technical assistance and training for targeted state and local
workforce organizations that receive funds under the Workforce
Investment Act (WIA). [8] Poorly performing states, as shown by the
performance measures (supplemented by analysis from regional DOL
staff), have received technical assistance designed to improve their
performance through PEP. DOL’s Office of Workforce Investment sent a
questionnaire to all the regional offices and held a conference with them at

8 Pub. L. No. 105-220 (Aug. 7, 1998). The Workforce Investment Act of 1998 required 17
employment and training programs, funded by four different agencies, to centralize service
delivery through a one-stop-center system. WIA also established performance measures
that look at a broad array of participant outcomes, such as job placement and retention,
earnings, skill gains, and customer satisfaction.

**Page 9** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

the close of the first PEP project [9] to assess the effectiveness of the
technical assistance that had been given. This information was used to
improve the second year’s project. Online tutorials have also been
developed under PEP in response to requests from states. [10]

Officials in the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) network that
includes facilities located in Maryland, Virginia, West Virginia, and
Pennsylvania, [11] stated that in response to one of the network facilities not
meeting the heart failure performance measure target, all of the facilities
adopted a new process to improve the network’s performance. According
to an official, in the first quarter of 2004, the network was at risk of not
meeting the entire set of 10 cardiovascular performance measures if one of
its facilities did not improve its low score on the heart failure performance
measure by the end of the year. [12] The heart failure performance measure is
a cumulative performance measure that assesses whether discharged heart
failure patients receive six types of instructions, including instructions for
monitoring weight after discharge and taking medications. The
instructions are critical because patients’ noncompliance with physicians’
instructions is often a cause for rehospitalization. An agency official stated
that the entire network implemented a new set of mandatory data fields in
patients’ electronic medical records. The data fields include the six types
of instructions and have to be filled out when a facility discharges a heart
failure patient. According to this official, the result of the implementation
of the new mandatory fields in the patients’ electronic records was that the
facility that was not meeting the heart failure performance measure target
in the first quarter improved its score to the “fully satisfactory” category in
the fourth quarter.

9 The first PEP project ended in June 2004. The second PEP project began in July 2004 and is
currently scheduled to end in August 2005.

10 [A tutorial became available online at www.workforcetools.org in December 2004.](http://www.workforcetools.org)

11 VHA networks are regional VHA units composed of health care facilities.

12 As will be discussed in more detail later in this report, if one of the facilities is failing a
performance measure, then the entire network fails the performance measure.

**Page 10** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

Performance Information
Can Be Used to Develop
Agency Strategy, Plan and
Budget, Identify Priorities
and Allocate Resources

Agencies can use performance information to make decisions that affect
future strategies, planning and budgeting, identifying priorities, and
allocating resources. We have previously reported that outcome-based
performance information should be used for the allocation of resources
and in deciding among competing priorities in a results-oriented
management system. [13] In addition, linking cost with performance
information infuses performance concerns into planning and budgetary
deliberations, prompting agencies to reassess their performance goals and
strategies and to more clearly understand the cost of performance.
Performance information also allows program managers to compare their
programs’ results with goals and thus determine where to target program
resources to improve performance. When managers are faced with
reduced resources, the same analysis can help them target reductions to
minimize negative impacts on program results. We found a number of
examples among our case agencies of managers using performance
information to identify priorities and allocate resources, and to shape
future program strategy.

The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) has used
performance information to set priorities in budgeting and to target
resources. The Senior Associate Administrator for Traffic Injury Control
annually sends out a memo that identifies agency priorities that support the
Department of Transportation’s (DOT) strategic goals and are based on
performance information for traffic-injury-related measures, such as safety
belt use and impaired driver rates. [14] The memo directs managers to focus
their programs and proposals to support these priorities.  In addition,
NHTSA used performance information on alcohol-related injuries and
fatalities to target grant funding and specific program strategies to states
with the highest impaired driver rates.  Using information reported
through the Fatality Analysis Reporting System (FARS), [15] NHTSA identified

13 GAO, _Results-Oriented Government: Using GPRA to Address 21_ _st_ _Century Challenges_,
[GAO-03-1166T (Washington, D.C.: Sept. 18, 2003); GAO,](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-03-1166T) _Results-Oriented Budget Practices_
_in Federal Agencies_ [, GAO-01-1084SP (Washington, D.C.: August 2001); and GAO,](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-01-1084SP) _Human_
_Capital: Key Principles for Effective Strategic Workforce Planning_ [, GAO-04-39](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-04-39)
(Washington, D.C.: December 2003).

14 Impaired driving is driving under the influence of alcohol or other drugs.

15 FARS is a database containing information on fatal crashes in the United States, including
specific details about crash circumstances and vehicle and victim demographic information.
It is maintained by NHTSA’s National Center for Statistics and Analysis.

**Page 11** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

13 states that represented 46 percent of the total number of alcohol-related
fatalities in the United States. Officials said NHTSA worked closely with
these 13 states to implement the impaired-driving program strategies it had
designed. The strategies involved state-sponsored, high-visibility law
enforcement activities in conjunction with a NHTSA-designed media
campaign. A NHTSA official said that the agency brought senior policy and
law enforcement officials from these states together and presented the
performance information and evaluations showing impaired driving rates
and the effectiveness of the high visibility law enforcement and media
campaign.  In order to receive funding, the targeted states had to agree to
implement the program that NHTSA had designed, including the media
campaign. After the publicized crackdown periods, NHTSA provided the
targeted states with additional evaluation resources.

The Small Business Administration (SBA) used performance and cost
information to reallocate resources to better meet priorities. In the 1990s,
SBA created Business Information Centers (BIC), a community partnership
service to provide entrepreneurs with access to computers and the Internet
to help them access business information and develop business plans.
Officials said that, as a partnership using hardware and software and
library resources donated from private technology companies, the program
was designed to require minimal SBA employee support or capital costs.
However, after analyzing financial and human capital resources, including
the data collected through their annual survey of how much support SBA
employees provide for various programs, they found that substantial
employee resources were being devoted to the BICs, on the order of $11
million. This cost information led SBA officials to reconsider the service.

Since computers had become more accessible to entrepreneurs than when
the BIC program was designed, and because assistance to entrepreneurs
could be provided more efficiently though other programs, SBA decided to
end its participation in the program and has phased out its role in the
community partnerships.

**Page 12** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

Performance Information
Can Be Used to Recognize
and Reward Performance

Agencies can use performance information to affect pay decisions and to
reward individuals, and in some cases, grantees. [16] Using performance
information this way reinforces accountability and creates incentives for
achieving results. We have previously reported that high-performing
public-sector organizations create a clear “line of sight” between individual
performance and organizational success [17] showing how team, unit, and
individual performance can contribute to overall organizational results.
There is growing recognition that the government needs to transform how
it compensates its employees to achieve greater results. To this end, some
agencies have implemented performance agreements as a vehicle for
bringing results-oriented performance information into evaluations of
performance. A revised performance-based pay system for members of the
Senior Executive Service (SES) across the federal government has been in
effect since January 2004, as authorized by Congress and overseen by the
Office of Personnel Management (OPM), where pay adjustments for SES
members are to be based on the alignment of individual performance and
contributions to the agency’s mission and strategic goals, among other
things. The human capital reforms under way at the Departments of
Defense and Homeland Security are intended to help them manage their
human capital to achieve results. We found several examples where case
agencies used performance information to recognize and reward
performance, as described next.

The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) uses performance information
to affect pay decisions. FAA has linked employee annual pay increases to
the achievement of agencywide goals through the performance-based pay
system. [18] At the end of fiscal year 2004, 78 percent of employees were
included in the agency’s performance-based pay system, which allocates

16 Agencies can also use performance information to recognize and reward contractors for
achieving results. However, we did not analyze any examples of performance-based
contracting for this report.

17 GAO-03-488.

18 We previously reviewed FAA’s human capital reforms and found that FAA had little data
with which to assess the effects of its reform effort. See GAO, _Human Capital_
_Management: FAA’s Reform Effort Requires a More Strategic Approach,_ [GAO-03-156,](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-03-156)
(Washington, D.C.: Feb. 3, 2003).

**Page 13** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

increases on the basis of individual and organizational performance. [19] At
the individual level, employees can receive two types of increases.
Employees earn the first increase for meeting individual goals and the
second increase for achieving outstanding individual performance. At the
organizational level, employees are eligible for the organizational success
increase (OSI). This is an agencywide pay increase based on the
performance of the agency as a whole on the 31 key performance measures
in the agency’s strategic plan, called the Flight Plan. [20] The OSI funding pool
consists of the amount of the general increase for General Schedule (GS)
employees in other federal agencies plus an additional 1 percent (which
reflects a portion of the funds previously spent on within-grade increases).
Receiving the full OSI depends on whether actual performance meets the
goals. In calendar year 2004, FAA employees received an OSI increase of
2.13 percent. FAA also offers Short Term Incentives to FAA senior staff for
achieving key performance targets and specified accomplishments in
implementing Flight Plan initiatives.

VHA uses performance information to create incentives for network
directors. We previously reported that the use of performance information
in performance agreements helped VHA define directors’ accountability for
specific goals and monitor progress during the year, and contributed to
their evaluations. VHA accomplishes this through the performance-based
review process, which links a director’s performance rating and
compensation to the performance of the network that he or she oversees.
Specifically, a director’s annual ratings and bonuses are based on how well
he or she meets the goals in the performance contract. As detailed in the
contract, the network director’s compensation is affected by that network’s
scores on performance measures, which include clinical waiting times, the
percentage of patients receiving cancer screenings, and patient
satisfaction. Half of the network director’s performance evaluation is
based upon the cumulative score on the network’s performance measures.

The Employment and Training Administration (ETA) uses performance
information to provide incentives for and apply sanctions to state programs
that receive grants under Title I of the Workforce Investment Act. The
authority to hold grantees accountable for performance in this manner is

19 Section 347 of the Fiscal Year 1996 Department of Transportation Appropriations Act,
Pub. L. No. 104-50 (Nov. 15, 1995), provided FAA with special flexibilities with regard to its
human capital policies. 49 U.S.C. § 40122.

20
[FAA’s 2005-2009 Flight Plan can be found online at http://www.faa.gov.](http://www.faa.gov)

**Page 14** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

Performance Information
Can Be Used to Identify and
Share More Effective
Processes and Approaches
to Program Implementation

provided for in the WIA legislation. [21] Each state negotiates performance
goals with DOL prior to the beginning of the program year for the 17 WIA
indicators measuring employment, retention, earnings, attainment of
credentials, attainment of skills, and customer satisfaction. [22] States are
eligible for incentive awards if they have exceeded performance goals set
for programs funded under 3 separate programs, one of which is WIA. [23] In
general, financial sanctions may be levied if performance is less than 80
percent of the negotiated performance levels for 2 consecutive years or if
the state fails to submit an accurate and complete annual performance
report. [24] Specific mitigating factors may be considered, such as
performance relative to other states, improvement efforts, and economic
conditions, among others.

We have reported that high-performing organizations continuously assess
and benchmark performance and efforts to improve performance. [25] They
evaluate their efforts using fact-based understandings of how their
activities contribute to accomplishing the mission and broader results, and
optimize their efforts through continuous improvement. Managers can use
performance information to identify and increase the use of program
approaches that are working well, and consider alternative processes in
areas where goals are not being met. Pilots and demonstration projects

21 29 U.S.C. § 2871(g). The authority to provide financial incentives and levy sanctions based
on performance is specific to WIA legislation and associated WIA programs. Similar
authority may or may not be provided for in legislation for other grant programs.

22 We have reported on quality issues regarding the performance data generated by state WIA
programs. In our report, _Workforce Investment Act: States and Local Areas Have_
_Developed Strategies to Assess Performance, but Labor Could Do More to Help,_ [GAO-04-657](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-04-657)
(Washington, D.C.: June 1, 2004) we discuss OMB’s proposed common measures, and data
quality issues such as the lack of consistent definitions which leads to variations in
reporting.

23 The two other programs are adult education and vocational education, authorized by the
Adult Education and Family Literacy Act and the Carl D. Perkins Vocational and Technical
Education Act, respectively.

24 More specific criteria for sanctions and incentives implementation can be found in DOL’s
Training and Employment Guidance Letter No. 19-02, located online at
http://wdr.doleta.gov/directives/attach/TEGL19-02.cfm.

25 GAO, _Highlights of a GAO Forum: High Performing Organizations: Metrics, Means, and_
_Mechanisms for Achieving High Performance in the 21_ _[st]_ _Century Public Management_
_Environment,_ [GAO-04-343SP (Washington, D.C.: Feb. 13, 2004).](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-04-343SP)

**Page 15** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

can be used to identify innovative ways to improve performance—by
allowing for experiences to be rigorously evaluated, and shared
systematically with others, and by allowing for new procedures to be
adjusted as appropriate—before receiving wider application.
Organizations can also use the process improvement technique of
benchmarking—comparing their processes with those of private and public
organizations that are thought to be the best in their fields. By
benchmarking its own processes against those of leading business and
government entities, an organization can learn how much change it needs
to make and what changes might be the right ones. We found examples of
these types of uses of performance information in the case agencies, as
described next.

On the basis of performance information from a pilot test, the National
Weather Service (NWS) adopted a more effective flash flood monitoring
and prediction tool on a national basis. NWS provides flash flood warning
services and verifies the timeliness and accuracy of its warnings. It aims to
improve its performance in this area through the flash flood performance
goals entitled, flash flood warning lead time and flash flood warning
accuracy, as outlined in its strategic plan. [26] A prototype flash flood
monitoring application was developed and first tested at the Pittsburgh
Weather Forecast Office (WFO) beginning in 1995. On the basis of
improved performance data achieved with the prototype and case studies
of several flash flood events in the Pittsburgh area, NWS decided to
develop and test an enhanced version of the pilot system. The enhanced
version, called the Flash Flood Monitoring and Prediction (FFMP)
Program, continuously monitors rainfall rates and hydrologic conditions to
provide automated alerts when a dangerous flood situation may be
developing on a given stream or catchment. In 2002 NWS began
implementing FFMP nationwide, with the aim of improving flash flood
services and helping NWS to meet its flash flood performance goals. Initial
training on how to use the FFMP system was provided for all WFOs and
additional training is provided at routinely offered courses. According to a
recent survey, nearly all of the WFOs were using the system. It is expected
that implementing the system will facilitate improvements in the accuracy
and timeliness of official NWS flash flood warnings, and enable forecasters
to provide more specific location information within a flash flood warning.

26
[The NWS Strategic Plan for 2005-2010 can be found online at http://www.nws.noaa.gov/sp/.](http://www.nws.noaa.gov/sp/)

**Page 16** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

ETA has used performance information on state and local workforce
investment areas to identify and nominate participants for the National
Business Learning Partnership’s (NBLP) peer-to-peer, mentoring initiative.
The NBLP, which started in October of 2003, links local workforce areas [27]
that want to improve their services (protégés) with workforce areas that
have exceeded performance standards (mentors). The program focuses on
the delivery of workforce services tailored to the needs of business and
industry in that specific workforce area. Overall, 19 mentor sites and 25
protégé sites have participated. Examples of the types of performance and
related information considered by ETA in selecting workforce areas to
nominate as mentors include the following: successful engagement with
businesses to meet the workforce needs of local industry; high
performance on the 17 legislated WIA performance indicators measuring
employment, retention, earnings, attainment of credentials, attainment of
skills, and customer satisfaction; and the transferability of mentor
practices to other areas. Protégés were selected on the basis of their desire
to improve their performance and services to businesses, and also on the
basis of whether they had problems meeting the WIA performance
measures. Each protégé site was matched with a mentor site to help it
develop a work plan. The protégés and mentors conducted at least two site
visits to each other’s respective areas to study the local workforce
investment operations and share information. In addition to peer-to-peer
consultation, NBLP case studies have been developed to provide a wider
audience with access to participants’ experiences and learning. Each case
study includes practices and principles to improve performance outcomes
by addressing the workforce needs of businesses and industries, as well as
a guide to facilitate shared learning and promote action. [28] To assess the
success of these partnerships, each protégé’s performance on selected WIA
measures will be compared from performance year 2003 through
performance year 2005. Additional measures of success will include such
considerations as contacts with businesses, resources leveraged, and
workers trained and placed in high-growth careers.

27 Workforce investment areas are designated within states by governors.

28 Three case studies have been published so far, and another five are being developed.

**Page 17** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

Management Practices
Can Enhance the Use

of Performance

Information

Agencies can adopt or apply a number of practices that can enhance the
use of performance information for policy and program decisions aimed at
improving results.  The concept of practices as used in this report includes
administrative or management tools, systems, or processes that agencies
can implement. From our interviews with experts and agency officials and
our review of related literature and agency documents, we identified five
types of practices that can facilitate greater use of performance
information. As illustrated in figure 5, the five types of practices are
demonstrating management commitment; aligning agency goals, objectives
and measures; improving the usefulness of performance information to
better meet management’s needs; developing agency capacity to effectively
use performance information; and frequently and effectively
communicating performance information within the agency. We discuss
the 5 practices in detail following the figure.

**Figure 5: Practices That Can Enhance or Facilitate the Use of Performance**
**Information for Management Decision Making**

**Improved results**

Source: GAO.

**Page 18** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

Demonstrating Management
Commitment

The commitment of agency managers to results-oriented management is
critical to increased use of performance information for policy and
program decisions. As we previously reported, [29] demonstrating the
willingness and ability to make decisions and manage programs on the
basis of results, and inspiring others to embrace such a model, are
important indicators of management’s commitment. Agency officials from
our case illustration programs also identified management commitment as
central to encouraging the use of performance information in decisions.
Officials from these agencies described how management showed this type
of commitment by leading frequent, regular performance review meetings
to discuss progress made toward the achievement of results, and by
involving staff from different organizational levels in performance review
meetings.  These methods assisted agencies in identifying performance
problems and in developing performance improvement plans based on
collected performance information.

SBA conducts monthly meetings with the associate administrator of each
mission and functional office to review that office’s performance. The
administrator, deputy administrator, and chief operating officer (COO)
participate. Each SBA office has performance measures organized along
three components of performance—office strategic goals, production
goals, and project goals—on a scorecard. Prior to meeting, the COO’s staff
review the monthly and cumulative performance information for each
office and ask each office to respond in writing to questions or concerns
based on the data. This analysis is the basis for the regular performance
review meetings. Officials said management’s commitment to regularly
reviewing performance increases performance ownership among staff and
competition among the offices to meet performance targets.

Similarly, FAA management demonstrates commitment through monthly,
day-long, agencywide performance review meetings that are led by the
Administrator and key associate administrators who serve as goal leads for
each FAA Flight Plan goal area: Increased Safety, Greater Capacity,
International Leadership, and Organizational Excellence. At these
meetings, officials said that they discuss performance for the agency’s 31
key performance metrics and the strategic initiatives supporting each.
When a business line is not meeting the performance targets for specific

29 GAO, _Managing for Results: Federal Managers’ Views Show Need for Ensuring Top_
_Leadership Skills_ [, GAO-01-127 (Washington, D.C.: Oct. 20, 2000).](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-01-127)

**Page 19** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

Aligning Agencywide Goals,
Objectives and Measures

metrics, officials report on efforts planned or under way to improve
performance. For metrics where performance targets have been met,
officials discuss the actions that were taken to achieve the targets. Officials
said that during this performance review, the Administrator identifies IOUs,
outlining agreed-upon actions to be implemented. Officials said that they
provide updates on the status of these IOUs at the following performance
review meeting.

At the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), managers are involved in
reviewing performance at different levels of the organization. Senior
management hold monthly departmentwide meetings to review
performance. According to officials, the meetings are chaired by the
Deputy Secretary and are attended by the heads of the three
administrations: VHA, the Veterans Benefit Administration, and the
National Cemetery Administration, as well as all of the staff offices within
VA. Each administration reports financial status, workload, and key
performance measures.  The Deputy Secretary has recently implemented
reporting by exception at the monthly performance review. Reporting by
exception requires that administration and staff offices offer an
explanation for less-than-desired performance, describe plans or ongoing
efforts to improve performance and discuss when results were expected.
At the following month’s performance review, status information is
presented to demonstrate progress. In addition, success stories and the
activities used to achieve them are also reported. According to officials,
within VHA, mid- and lower-level managers are also involved in regular
performance review meetings, including meetings involving the Deputy
Under Secretary and the directors of the regional networks, meetings of
network directors and their facility directors, and meetings between
facility directors and their staff. In addition, according to officials, each of
the facilities in one of the networks we visited, which includes VA facilities
in California, Nevada, Hawaii and the Philippines, assigns a “champion”
who is responsible for monitoring and presenting results for a specific
performance measure at weekly facility management meetings.

Agencies can encourage greater use of performance information by
aligning agencywide goals and objectives, and by aligning program
performance measures at each operating level with those goals and
objectives. GPRA requires that agencies use performance measurement to
reinforce the connection between their long-term strategic goals and the
day-to-day activities of their managers and staff. As we reported

**Page 20** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

previously, [30] in order to meet the GPRA requirements, an agency should
cascade its goals and objectives throughout the organization and should
align performance measures to the objectives from the executive level
down to the operational levels. This forms hierarchies of goals and
objectives and performance information that are appropriate to the
managerial responsibilities and controls at each level of the organization.
This alignment increases the usefulness of the performance information
collected to decision makers at each level, and reinforces the connection
between strategic goals and the day-to-day activities of managers and staff.
We have also reported that a greater focus on results can be created by
cascading organizational goals and objectives down to the individual
performance level. Earlier in this report, we described how agencies can
use performance information to recognize and reward performance and
encourage the achievement of results. Alignment facilitates the linking of
individual performance to organizational performance.

FAA promotes alignment by requiring that all organizations use the same
alignment framework and approach in preparing their annual business
plans.  Goals cascade throughout each of FAA’s 16 organizations to each
individual employee. The agency goals detailed in FAA’s strategic plan (or
Flight Plan) drive new strategic initiatives and the ongoing, day-to-day
operations of FAA, referred to as their core business functions. Key
elements required in the business plans for each of FAA’s four lines of
business and 12 offices are developed using a systematic alignment
approach that guides the organizations through the step-by-step process of
defining and developing performance elements that support the Flight Plan
goals. Organizations align themselves with the Flight Plan through this
process, and targets cascade down through the organization into employee
performance plans. These plans identify specific work expectations and
outcomes, and are required for every FAA employee. This alignment
facilitates FAA recognizing and rewarding performance by using
performance information to affect pay decisions, as described earlier in
this report.

VHA’s performance measures are aligned through different levels of the
organization.  The same performance measures are used to assess VHA’s
performance from the VHA-wide level down through the network levels to
the individual facilities. For example, the performance measure of the
percentage of patients receiving breast cancer screening is used at all three

30 GAO/GGD-96-118.

**Page 21** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

Improving the Usefulness of
Performance Information to
Better Meet Management’s
Decision-Making Needs

levels. As mentioned earlier in this report, the performance score of a
facility can have an effect upon the entire network to which it belongs. As
an illustration of how performance is “rolled up,” officials stated that in
order to get a fully satisfactory rating at the network level, 80 percent of the
hospitals in that network must have met their goals. Officials stated that if
any facility is at the failing level for a performance measure, the entire
network will also be rated as failing the measure. In addition, alignment
contributes to VHA’s ability to use performance information to provide
incentives for network directors, through the performance-based review
process described earlier.

To ensure that performance information will be both useful and used in
decision making throughout the organization, agencies need to consider
users’ differing policy and management information needs. Practices that
improve the usefulness of performance information can help to meet those
needs. We reported previously [31] that to be useful, performance information
must meet users’ needs for completeness, accuracy, consistency,
timeliness, validity, and ease of use. Other attributes that affect the
usefulness of information include, but are not limited to, relevance,
credibility, and accessibility. We have reported previously on a number of
practices that improve the usefulness of performance information to
different users. [32] Measures should be selected specifically on the basis of
their ability to inform the decisions made at each organizational level, and
should be appropriate to the responsibilities and control at each level. In
that regard, involving managers in the development of performance goals
and measures is critical to increasing the relevance and therefore the
usefulness of performance information to their day-to-day activities.
Agency officials in our case illustrations identified a number of practices
that increased the usefulness of performance information, including its
relevance, ease of use, timeliness, and accessibility.

As discussed earlier, EBSA contracted with an outside organization to
collect more useful customer satisfaction information. By increasing the
scope and depth of customer satisfaction data, the information has been
made more relevant, and therefore, more useful to management’s day-to

31 GAO-04-38.

32 GAO _, Performance Plans: Selected Approaches for Verification and Validation of Agency_
_Performance Information,_ [GAO/GGD-99-139 (Washington, D.C.: July 30, 1999).](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO/GGD-99-139)

**Page 22** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

day activities.  Prior to this contract, EBSA used another contractor that
provided a general high-level index of customer satisfaction that provided
comparability to other organizations. However, in order to provide this
comparability, the survey questions had to be standardized in a manner that
was not as relevant for EBSA as for other organizations. In addition, the
first customer satisfaction survey did not provide a means for EBSA to
disaggregate data to identify specific aspects of its performance.
Recognizing that the information did not fully meet their needs, EBSA staff
identified a new contractor to create and conduct a specialized customer
satisfaction survey of clients that will provide comparability from year to
year even if it does not provide comparability among other organizations.
Survey questions are now tailored to EBSA’s needs. Specific questions can
be added and data disaggregated and analyzed as needed to focus in on
potential problem areas. For example, data can be broken down by
categories such as regional office, benefit advisor, and type of inquiry.

The Enforcement Office of the Department of Labor’s EBSA Office
implemented a new Enforcement Management System (EMS) that officials
say improved the usefulness of performance information, making it more
timely, accessible, and easy to use. The system, implemented in 1999,
manages information related to investigations into the potential violation of
benefits laws. These investigations are conducted by 385 investigators
located at EBSA field offices across the country. Prior to the development
of the EMS, officials said that the Enforcement Office had a simple
database system located at headquarters and that field offices used a
separate case management system. [33] The EMS was custommade for the
Enforcement Office. It tracks information about every investigation
nationwide throughout its lifecycle, providing both field and headquarters
staff access to real-time information. According to officials, not only does
the system make information more timely and accessible, it has increased
the ease of use and relevance of performance information by incorporating
user-friendly windows technology and allowing users to define their own
information needs with customized queries and reports. In addition, over
30 standardized statistical and case reports are available. Standardized
statistical reports allow managers to view, by selected geographic area,
summaries of such information as the different investigation types (e.g.,
fiduciary and criminal), the cases referred for litigation, and closed cases

33 We reviewed EBSA’s previous database system in GAO, _Pension and Welfare Benefits_
_Administration: Opportunities Exist for Improving Management of the Enforcement_
_Program_ [, GAO-02-232 (Washington, D.C., Mar. 15, 2002).](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-02-232)

**Page 23** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

along with the associated results. Headquarters provides additional
analysis of the information regarding overall progress toward policy goals,
allowing adjustments to be made in the field offices.

SBA has involved its program managers in the development of the agency’s
performance measurement system, allowing offices to determine their own
goals and measures.  This practice increases the usefulness of
performance information to the activities of offices and programs, and SBA
officials credit it with creating buy-in and ownership of the performance
measurement system. Measures and targets must meet certain
requirements as overseen by the chief operating officer. For example,
measures should support the strategic goals; measures should be valid,
measurable, and verifiable; and the set of measures as a whole should
contain both qualitative and quantitative measures. At the beginning of
each year when the measures and targets are being selected, assistance is
provided for any program upon request to help with selecting appropriate

measures.

SBA has also initiated a practice aimed at documenting and improving the
overall usefulness of performance information and increasing its use.
Programs are required to identify the intended use of each measure in
decisions related to policy and to provide an assessment of how fit the
information is for this use. The importance of this practice is that it
promotes the selection of performance measures that better meet
managements’ needs, providing information that is relevant, and
sufficiently complete, accurate, consistent, and timely for management’s
decision-making needs. To facilitate and document the practice, SBA’s
Office of Analysis, Planning and Accountability developed an assessment
tool for its indicators in the form of the Data Validation Table,” [34] shown in
figure 6. These tables are updated annually for every indicator published in
the SBA Performance and Accountability Report. In addition to
documenting the intended use, the office must provide an assessment of
the information’s completeness, accuracy, consistency, and timeliness.
Validation Tables also document the associated office and program; what
outcomes are being assessed; how each outcome is aligned with agency
goals; the system in which the data are kept; and any limitations to the use
of the information in the intended manner and associated remedies, among
other items.

34 Tables for specific SBA metrics can be found online at
[http://www.sba.gov/PAR.pdf/strategicgoal1.html.](http://www.sba.gov/PAR.pdf/strategicgoal1.html)

**Page 24** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

**Figure 6: SBA Data Validation Table**

Source: SBA.

**Page 25** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

Developing Agency
Capacity

The practice of building analytical capacity to use performance
information—both in terms of staff trained to do analysis and availability of
research and evaluation resources—is critical to using performance
information in a meaningful fashion.  Our 2003 GPRA survey found that
there was a positive relationship between agencies providing training and
development on setting program performance goals and the use of
performance information when setting or revising performance goals. We
have previously reported [35] on the need for agencies to expend resources on
effective training and professional development to equip federal employees
to work effectively. Specifically, managers and staff need competencies
and skills to plan strategically, develop robust measures of performance,
and analyze what the performance data mean. Performance management
literature also states that training is a key factor in improving employees’
capabilities and enabling employee involvement in achieving performance
improvements. We found examples where our case illustration agencies
built capacity through providing staff with training in the performance
management system and by providing access to technical assistance, such
as having designated evaluation support staff or performance measurement
experts available.

The VHA network that includes health care facilities located in California,
Nevada, Hawaii, and the Philippines builds agency capacity by providing
annual training on performance measures for facility managers. The
training is coordinated by a performance measurement committee
composed of clinical leadership and quality management staff from each of
the facilities. The committee’s mission includes providing education on the
performance measures beyond the annual training, as well as sharing and
implementing strategies to facilitate meeting the performance
measurement targets. At the annual training conference, all of the
performance measures are discussed, including existing measures as well
as any new measures. The training lasts for a day or two, and facility
managers can participate in person, on the telephone, or by
videoconference. In addition, the performance measurement committee is
also a resource throughout the year for questions on the performance

measures.

NHTSA has established capacity to use performance information through
its research and evaluation office. According to one official, NHTSA has

35 GAO-04-38.

**Page 26** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

Communicating
Performance Information
Frequently and Effectively

had internal analytic capacity through a research office for more than 25
years. The evaluation office provides the capacity to conduct research and
evaluations on the effectiveness of NHTSA’s Traffic Injury Control Office
programs and initiatives, which address issues such as safety related to
alcohol- and drug-impaired driving, pedestrians, bicycles, motorcycles,
school buses, emergency medical services, older drivers, and driver fatigue
and inattention. We previously reported that NHTSA’s evaluation office
provides the capacity for a three-phase evaluation process. [36] First, studies
identify the nature of the problem and possible solutions. Second, costbenefit analyses identify the expected consequences or alternative
approaches. Third, follow-up studies assess the consequences of policy or
regulatory changes, since effects of some changes may not be apparent
until 5 or more years after the introduction of changes. According to a
NHTSA official, it is important to have this capacity because the Traffic
Injury Control Office does not have any regulatory authority, and needs the
analysis and evaluations to demonstrate that the proposed programs are
effective in order to persuade states to implement them. In addition, we
have previously reported that evaluations can improve agency use of
performance information by providing performance information that may
otherwise be unavailable; by validating the accuracy of performance data;
by explaining the reasons for observed performance; or, finally, by
identifying ways to improve performance.

Improving the communication of performance information among staff and
stakeholders can facilitate the use of performance information by agency
managers. Improvements can be achieved through frequent and routine
communication, and the use of effective communication tools, such as
visual aids. We previously reported that frequent, regular communication
is key for managers to inform staff and other stakeholders of their
commitment to achieve the agency’s goals and to keep these goals in mind
as they pursue their day-to-day activities. [ 37] Frequently reporting
performance information also allows managers to review the information
in time to take action to make improvements. Program managers can also
communicate performance information upward through the management
hierarchy, and across operating units. We found a number of vehicles

36 GAO, _Program Evaluation: An Evaluation Culture and Collaborative Partnerships Help_
_Build Agency Capacity_ [, GAO-03-454 (Washington, D.C.: May 2, 2003).](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-03-454)

37 GAO/GGD-96-118.

**Page 27** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

through which agencies communicated performance information
effectively. For example, agencies maintained frequent, routine
communication among managers and staff through visual tools such as
poster displays, performance scorecards, and intranet sites. Some agencies
provided performance updates through regular e-mail or the distribution of
monthly performance review meeting minutes. In addition, officials said
publicizing performance information can inspire ownership of a unit’s
performance, as well as competition between units. For example,
scorecards or other visual presentations of performance information
enable staff to compare and analyze performance, resulting in a
competitive interest in improving performance. We found examples in
selected agencies of the practice of frequent and routine communication
and using visual tools to communicate performance information.

NWS uses a number of display tools to convey performance information to
staff and management at different levels of the organization. Quad charts
and display boards are two examples. Quad charts arose out of the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) efforts to
improve budgeting and planning systems, and have also been used at the
NWS. They are one-page summaries that provide pertinent information for
decision-making purposes. One particular type of quad chart is prepared to
inform agency executives about program performance. These quad charts
are prepared by each major program and presented during NOAA’s
quarterly executive panels. These panels are composed of the Deputy
Under Secretary of NOAA and the deputies of the line offices. A one-page
chart is divided into four quadrants containing the following four areas:
Performance Parameters (metrics and threshold values for selected
performance indicators); Schedule of Activities (including schedule
status); Key Issues and Risks; and Funding (budgetary issues). For each of
these topics, status is also color-coded in green, yellow, or red.  An
example of this type of quad chart is shown in figure 7. Similar types of
quad charts are prepared by managers requesting program adjustments
(such as changes in funding) and for selected NWS and NOAA programs.
Some quad charts also include GPRA performance measures when
applicable to a NOAA or NWS program.

**Page 28** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

**Figure 7: NOAA Quad Chart Template**

Source: NOAA.

NWS also uses display boards at all of its field and regional offices to
communicate information to all staff. As shown in figure 8, display boards
convey national, regional, and site performance information on GPRA
measures relevant to specific site activities. These charts allow site
personnel to compare the site’s performance with performance measured
at the regional and national levels. Sites can update their own performance

**Page 29** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

**Figure 8: NOAA Display Board Template**

measures as often as monthly, while national data are updated annually.
Comparable site-level information is available for all sites on the NOAA
Intranet.

Source: NOAA.

FAA communicates performance information to all staff through a monthly
performance scorecard. The scorecard is organized into a table, and

**Page 30** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

includes the actual and targeted performance levels for the agency’s 31 key
metrics, as identified in FAA’s strategic plan, or Flight Plan. Each metric is
color coded, using the stoplight system of red, yellow, or green, according
to how closely actual performance met the targeted performance for each
month. The scorecard is posted on FAA’s Intranet and is updated monthly.
The same information is reported in more detail on a quarterly basis on
FAA’s external Web site. [38] An example of one of the metrics in the quarterly
report, Runway Incursions, [39] is shown in figure 9.

38 The FAA Quarterly Performance Report can be found online at
[http://www.faa.gov/about/plans_reports/performance/performancetargets/book0/section0/](http://www.faa.gov/about/plans_reports/performance/performancetargets/book0/section0/section.html)
[section.html](http://www.faa.gov/about/plans_reports/performance/performancetargets/book0/section0/section.html) _._

39 A runway incursion is any occurrence in the airport runway environment involving an
aircraft, vehicle, person, or object on the ground that creates a collision hazard or results in
a loss of required separation with an aircraft taking off, intending to take off, landing, or
intending to land.

**Page 31** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

**Figure 9: FAA Scorecard for Runway Incursions**

Source: FAA.

**Page 32** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

Conclusions Our 2003 survey of federal managers found that, despite the fact that
managers reported having more performance measures, the use of
performance information for program management activities did not
increase significantly from 1997 levels when GPRA was first implemented
governmentwide. Creating results-oriented cultures in which performance
information is routinely used to make key management decisions will
require the sustained attention and commitment of top agency leadership
and more widespread adoption of the practices identified in this report.
The five federal agencies that we examined for this report provide
examples of how agencies can use performance information for key
management decisions and practices that can facilitate such use. The
specific ways in which the case agencies used performance information or
implemented the practices may not be appropriate for wholesale adoption
throughout the federal government because agencies face different
management conditions and challenges, and operate under different
authorities. Nevertheless, the general uses and practices highlighted in this
report are universal and could be adapted by each agency. Helpful next
steps would be for the relevant experiences of agencies in using
performance information and adopting practices that facilitate use of
performance information to be more widely shared, and for agencies to be
encouraged to adapt practices to their unique situations.

Agency Comments The Departments of Commerce, Labor, Transportation, and Veterans
Affairs, and the Small Business Administration provided technical
comments that were incorporated where appropriate throughout the
report.

As agreed with your office, we will send copies of this report to the
Director of the Office of Management and Budget and other interested
parties. We will also make copies available to others upon request. In
addition, the report will be available at no charge on GAO’s Web site at
[http://www.gao.gov.](http://www.gao.gov)

Please contact me on (202) 512-6543 if you or your staff have any questions
about this report. Contact points for our Office of Congressional Relations

**Page 33** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. Other
contacts and staff acknowledgments are listed in appendix II.

Sincerely yours,

Bernice Steinhardt

Director, Strategic Issues

**Page 34** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

Appendix I

**AppendixesAppendix I**
###### Scope and Methodology

To identify uses of performance information and practices that encourage
the use of performance information, we reviewed our prior reports and
other relevant literature and interviewed agency officials. In addition, we
interviewed experts in using performance information from the following
organizations: the School of Public Policy at the University of Maryland; the
School of Policy, Planning and Development at the University of Southern
California; the Institute for the Study of Public Policy Implementation at
American University; the School of Public Policy and Public Administration
at George Washington University; the Urban Institute; the IBM Center for
the Business of Government; and the Mercatus Center.

To identify examples of ways in which managers use performance
information and practices that enhance their use of that information, we
selected five federal agencies that were identified as having a greater
likelihood of using performance information: the Departments of
Commerce (DOC), Labor (DOL), Transportation (DOT), and Veterans
Affairs (VA); and the Small Business Administration (SBA). Among the
factors that we considered in guiding our selection processs were that the
agencies received relatively high scores on the 2000 GAO Government
Performance and Results Act survey results regarding the extent to which
managers reported using performance information, [1] relatively good marks
on the September 2004 Executive Branch Management Scorecard
(President’s Management Agenda), and/or recommendations from
interviews with experts. We also considered diversity in terms of program
type and size.

Table 1 contains brief background information on the agencies within the
selected departments that are highlighted in our case examples.

1 GAO-01-592.

**Page 35** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

**Appendix I**
**Scope and Methodology**

**Table 1: Background Information on Agencies Selected to Illustrate Performance Information Uses and Practices**

**Department** **Selected program**
**or agency** **Selected agencies or offices** **type**

DOL **Employment and Training Administration (ETA)**
ETA provides job training, employment and labor market information, and income
maintenance services. Within ETA, the Office of Workforce Investment (OWI) is
responsible for providing national leadership, oversight, policy guidance, and technical
assistance for the one-stop public employment service system and the youth and adult
employment and training programs funded under the Workforce Investment Act (WIA).

**Employee Benefits Security Administration (EBSA)**
EBSA is tasked with protecting the integrity of pensions, health plans, and other
employee benefits. EBSA’s Office of Participant Assistance (OPA) provides information
and assistance for individuals covered by private retirement and health and welfare
plans, plan sponsors, and members of the employee benefits community. EBSA’s goal
is to enable participants to better understand and exercise their rights under the law,
and when possible, recover any benefits to which they may be entitled. They also seek
to give practitioners the opportunity to better understand and comply with the law. The
Office of Enforcement is tasked with protecting pension and welfare benefits under
ERISA. The Office of Enforcement’s investigative field staff conduct investigations to
detect and correct violations of Title I of ERISA and related criminal laws.

VA **Veterans Health Administration (VHA)**
The mission of VHA is to assist veterans by providing comprehensive healthcare
services including primary care, specialized care, and related medical and social
support. Comprehensive health care services are provided for veterans through VHA’s
field facilities and Veterans Integrated Service Networks. VHA’s medical system
consists of 21 of these integrated networks of care whose focus is pooling and aligning

resources.

SBA **Small Business Administration (SBA)**
The principal mission of the Small Business Administration is to maintain and
strengthen the nation's economy by aiding, counseling, assisting and protecting the
interests of small businesses and by helping families and businesses recover from
national disasters. Within SBA, the Office of Capital Access assists small businesses in
obtaining loans necessary for growth by being a gap lender, assisting small businesses
that otherwise would not qualify for un-guaranteed financing in obtaining equity, or
taking advantage of procurement opportunities. The Office of Government Contracting
and Business Development promotes increased small business participation in the
federal procurement market for goods and services and fulfills SBA’s statutory mission
to ensure that a fair share of federal procurement goes to small businesses. The Office
of Entrepreneurial Development, through a network of partners and its own on-line
Small Business Training Network, provides counseling, training and business
information to small entrepreneurs. These resources help to start and grow small
businesses throughout the country. The Office of Disaster Assistance provides
affordable, timely, and accessible financial assistance for homeowners, renters, and
businesses of all sizes affected by disaster. Financial assistance is available in the form
of low-interest, long-term loans.

Block/
formula grants

Regulatory-based

Direct federal

Direct federal; credit;
block/formula grants;
competitive grant

**Page 36** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

**Appendix I**
**Scope and Methodology**

_(Continued From Previous Page)_

**Department** **Selected program**
**or agency** **Selected agencies or offices** **type**

DOT **National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA)**
NHTSA’s mission is to save lives, prevent injuries, and reduce economic costs due to
road traffic crashes. NHTSA establishes and enforces automobile safety regulations,
including crash avoidance and crashworthiness standards, and consumer protection
standards, including fuel efficiency standards, bumper standards, and regulations
relating to odometer tampering and domestic content labeling. NHTSA also
investigates safety defects and carries out the duties and the powers of DOT to provide
for aspects of highway safety other than highway safety design features, such as driver
performance.

**Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)**
The mission of the FAA is to improve the safety and efficiency of aviation. FAA
promotes safe flight of civil aircraft in air commerce by prescribing standards for the
design; material; construction; quality of work; and performance of aircraft, aircraft
engines, and propellers. In addition, FAA issues certificates such as those for
airworthiness and airport operations. FAA also helps develop and maintain a safe and
efficient nationwide system of public-use airports that meets the present and future
needs of civil aeronautics. Finally, FAA licenses commercial space launches and the
operation of nonfederal launch sites within the United States and by U.S. citizens
abroad.

DOC **National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)**
The mission of NOAA is to understand and predict changes in the earth’s environment
and to conserve and manage coastal and marine resources to meet our nation’s
economic, social, and environmental needs. A part of NOAA, the National Weather
Service (NWS) provides weather, hydrologic, and climate forecasts and warnings for
the United States, its territories, adjacent waters, and ocean areas; for the protection of
life and property; and for the enhancement of the national economy. NWS produces
and maintains data in a national information database, the products and infrastructure
of which are used by other governmental agencies, the private sector, the public, and
the international community.

Source: GAO.

Block/formula grant;
regulatory-based

Direct federal;
competitive grant;
regulatory-based

Direct federal

Within each of the five selected agencies, we conducted interviews with
program/policy management and staff to obtain their suggestions regarding
specific programs in which performance information has been used for
management. We then interviewed staff involved with those programs in
more detail and reviewed related documents to obtain further information

about how those programs have used performance information and any
associated practices that have contributed to those uses. We selected
specific examples to highlight each use and practice and to illustrate
particular aspects of how that use or practice was implemented within
specific agency program contexts and across various program types. We
did not attempt to identify all agencies and programs that could have
illustrated these uses and practices. In addition, while we did review
existing relevant information regarding performance data quality where
available, we did not systematically assess the quality of the performance

**Page 37** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

**Appendix I**
**Scope and Methodology**

information used in the examples we cite. Finally, for most of the
examples, we describe how performance information was used to make
decisions, but we did not attempt to verify that the use ultimately resulted
in improved outcomes.

From our review of the literature and interviews with experts and staff
from the five agencies, we developed a conceptual framework identifying
four categories of uses of performance information and five categories of
practices that contribute to using performance information. The
framework and categories of uses and practices are consistent with the
themes identified in our March 2003 report on results-oriented cultures and
effective performance management, and are consistent with additional
GAO reports on GPRA and results-oriented government. [2] The four use
categories in our framework that we identified through our independent
analysis are similar to the four types of uses identified in _How Federal_
_Programs Use Outcome Information: Opportunities for Federal_
_Managers_, by Harry Hatry, Elaine Morley, Shelli Rossman, and Joseph
Wholey, published by the IBM Endowment for The Business of Government
in May 2003. We recognize that alternative categories of uses and practices
could have been developed and that there may be additional uses and
practices that we did not identify.

To provide additional support and further illustrate the uses and practices,
we conducted two discussion groups. The first discussion group included
about 15 agency officials from the 5 selected case agencies and was
intended to gain further perspective on those agencies’ uses and practices.
To broaden the range of experiences we could draw upon, we also
conducted a second discussion group consisting of about 15
representatives from 5 different agencies that were not in the pool of
selected case agencies: the Departments of Agriculture, Health and Human
Services, Housing and Urban Development, the Interior, and Justice. For
each discussion group, we asked agencies to nominate potential
participants who had hands-on experience with using performance
information, at least 3 years of management experience, and were at a GS13 level or higher. We selected participants on the basis of their selfdescribed experience using performance information and selected them to
reflect a range of programs within agencies.

2
[GAO-01-592, GAO-03-488, and GAO-04-38.](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-01-592)

**Page 38** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

**Appendix I**
**Scope and Methodology**

We conducted our review from September 2004 through August 2005 in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.

**Page 39** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

Appendix II

**Appendix I**
###### GAO Contact and Staff Acknowledgments

GAO Contact [Bernice Steinhardt (202) 512-6543 or steinhardtb@gao.gov.](mailto:steinhardtb@gao.gov)

Acknowledgments In addition to the contact name above, Elizabeth Curda, Assistant Director;
Maya Chakko; Chelsa Gurkin; Anne Inserra; Anne Marie Morillon; and
Susan Wilschke made significant contributions to this report. In addition,
Tom Beall provided key assistance.

**Page 40** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

###### Bibliography

Ammons, David N. _Municipal Benchmarks: Assessing Local_
_Performance and Establishing Community Standards._ Thousand
Oaks, California: Sage Publications, 1996.

Fountain, James, Wilson Campbell, Terry Patton, Paul Epstein, Mandi
Cohn, Mark Abrahams and Jonathan Walters. _Reporting Performance_
_Information: Suggested Criteria for Effective Communication._
Governmental Accounting Standards Board: Norwalk, Connecticut,
2003.

Hatry, Harry P., _Performance Measurement: Getting Results_ . Washington,
D.C.: The Urban Institute, 1999.

------“Public and Private Agencies Need to Manage for Results, Not Just
Measure Them.” Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute, August 31,
2004. http://www.urban.org/url.cfm?ID=900731

Hatry, Harry P., Elaine Morley, Shelli B. Rossman and Joseph S. Wholey.
_How Federal Programs Use Outcome Information: Opportunities for_
_Federal Managers_ . Washington, D.C.: IBM Center for the Business of
Government, 2003.

Morley, Elaine, Harry P. Hatry and Jake Cowan. _Making Use of Outcome_
_Information for Improving Services: Recommendations for Nonprofit_
_Organizations._ Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute, 2002.

Newcomer, Kathryn, Edward T. Jennings, Jr., Cheryle Broom and Allen
Lomax. _Meeting the Challenges of Performance-Oriented Government_ .
Washington, D.C.: American Society for Public Administration, 2002.

Osborne, David and Peter Hutchinson. _The Price of Government: Getting_
_the Results We Need in an Age of Permanent Fiscal Crisis_ . New York:
Basic Books, 2004.

Wholey, Joseph S. _Overcoming the Challenges in Managing for Results_ .
Washington, D.C.: IBM Center for the Business of Government, 2004.

**Page 41** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

###### Related GAO Products

_Workforce Investment Act: States and Local Areas Have Developed_
_Strategies to Assess Performance, but Labor Could Do More to Help_ [. GAO-](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-04-651)
[04-651. Washington, D.C.: June 1, 2004.](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-04-651)

_Results-Oriented Government: GPRA Has Established a Solid Foundation_

_for Achieving Greater Results._ [GAO-04-38. Washington, D.C.: March 10,](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-04-38)
2004.

_Highlights of a GAO Forum: High Performing Organizations: Metrics,_
_Means, and Mechanisms for Achieving High Performance in the 21_ _[st]_
_Century Public Management Environment_ [. GAO-04-343SP. Washington,](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-04-343SP)
D.C.: February 13, 2004.

_Human Capital: Key Principles for Effective Strategic Workforce_
_Planning_ [. GAO-04-39. Washington, D.C.: December 11, 2003.](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-04-39)

_Results-Oriented Government: Using GPRA to Address 21_ _[st]_ _Century_
_Challenges._ [GAO-03-1166T. Washington, D.C.: September 18, 2003.](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-03-1166T)

_Program Evaluation: An Evaluation Culture and Collaborative_
_Partnerships Help Build Agency Capacity_ [. GAO-03-454. Washington, D.C.:](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-03-454)
May 2, 2003.

_Results-Oriented Cultures: Creating a Clear Linkage between Individual_
_Performance and Organizational Success_ [. GAO-03-488. Washington, D.C.:](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-03-488)
March 14, 2003.

_Human Capital Management: FAA’s Reform Effort Requires a More_
_Strategic Approach_ [. GAO-03-156. Washington, D.C.: February 3, 2003.](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-03-156)

_Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration: Opportunities Exist for_
_Improving Management of the Enforcement Program_ [. GAO-02-232.](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-02-232)
Washington, D.C.: March 15, 2002.

_Results-Oriented Budget Practices in Federal Agencies_ [. GAO-01-1084SP.](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-01-1084SP)
Washington, D.C.: August 2001.

_Managing for Results: Federal Managers’ Views on Key Management_
_Issues Vary Widely Across Agencies_ [. GAO-01-592. Washington, D.C.: May](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-01-592)
25, 2001.

**Page 42** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

**Related GAO Products**

_Managing for Results: Federal Managers’ Views Show Need for Ensuring_
_Top Leadership Skills_ [. GAO-01-127. Washington, D.C.: October 20, 2000.](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-01-127)

_Performance Plans: Selected Approaches for Verification and Validation_
_of Agency Performance Information_ [. GAO/GGD-99-139. Washington, D.C.:](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO/GGD-99-139)
July 30, 1999.

_Executive Guide: Effectively Implementing the Government Performance_
_and Results Act_ [. GAO/GGD-96-118. Washington, D.C.: June 1996.](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO/GGD-96-118)

_Results-Oriented Cultures: Insights for U.S. Agencies from Other_
_Countries’ Performance Management Initiatives_ [. GAO-02-862.](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-02-862)
Washington, D.C.: August 2, 2002.

_Managing for Results: Efforts to Strengthen the Link Between Resources_
_and Results at the Veterans Health Administration_ [. GAO-03-10.](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-03-10)

Washington, D.C.: December 10, 2002.

_Results-Oriented Cultures: Implementation Steps to Assist Mergers and_
_Organizational Transformations_ [. GAO-03-669. Washington, D.C.: July 2,](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-03-669)
2003.

_Human Capital: Senior Executive Performance Management Can Be_
_Significantly Strengthened to Achieve Results._ [GAO-04-614. Washington,](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-04-614)
D.C.: May 26, 2004.

_Workforce Investment Act: Labor Should Consider Alternative Approaches_
_to Implement New Performance and Reporting Requirements_ [. GAO-05-](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-05-539)
[539. Washington, D.C.: May 27, 2005.](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-05-539)

_The Government Performance and Results Act: 1997 Governmentwide_
_Implementation Will Be Uneven._ [GAO/GGD-97-109. Washington, D.C.:](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO/GGD-97-109)
June 2, 1997.

_Tax Administration: IRS Needs to Further Refine Its Tax Filing Season_
_Performance Measures_ [. GAO-03-143. Washington, D.C.: November 22, 2002.](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-03-143)

_Architect of The Capitol: Midyear Status Report on Implementation of_
_Management Review Recommendations_ [. GAO-04-966. Washington, D.C.:](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-04-966)
August 31, 2004.

**Page 43** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

**(450365)**

**Related GAO Products**

_Managing For Results: Emerging Benefits From Selected Agencies’ Use of_
_Performance Agreements._ [GAO-01-115. Washington, D.C.: October 30,](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-01-115)
2000.

_Human Capital: Observations on Final DHS Human Capital_
_Regulations_ [. GAO-05-391T. Washington, D.C.: March 2, 2005.](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-05-391T)

_Managing For Results: Strengthening Regulatory Agencies’ Performance_
_Management Practices_ [. GAO/GGD-00-10. Washington, D.C.: October 28,](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO/GGD-00-10)
1999.

_Human Capital: A Self-Assessment Checklist for Agency Leaders_ .
[GAO/OCG-00-14G. Washington, D.C.: September 2000.](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO/OCG-00-14G)

_Managing For Results: Challenges Agencies Face in Producing Credible_
_Performance Information_ [. GAO/GGD-00-52. Washington, D.C.: February 4,](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO/GGD-00-52)
2000.

_Human Capital: Preliminary Observations on Proposed DOD National_
_Security Personnel System Regulations_ [. GAO-05-432T. Washington, D.C.:](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-05-432T)
March 15, 2005.

**Page 44** **GAO-05-927 Managing for Results**

GAO’s Mission The Government Accountability Office, the audit, evaluation and
investigative arm of Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting its
constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and
accountability of the federal government for the American people. GAO
examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and policies;
and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance to help
Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding decisions. GAO’s
commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of
accountability, integrity, and reliability.

Obtaining Copies of
GAO Reports and
Testimony

The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost
[is through GAO’s Web site (www.gao.gov). Each weekday, GAO posts](http://www.gao.gov)
newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence on its Web site. To
have GAO e-mail you a list of newly posted products every afternoon, go to
[www.gao.gov and select “Subscribe to Updates.”](http://www.gao.gov)

Order by Mail or Phone The first copy of each printed report is free. Additional copies are $2 each.
A check or money order should be made out to the Superintendent of
Documents. GAO also accepts VISA and Mastercard. Orders for 100 or
more copies mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. Orders
should be sent to:

441 G Street NW, Room LM
Washington, D.C. 20548

To order by Phone: Voice: (202) 512-6000
TDD: (202) 512-2537
Fax: (202) 512-6061

To Report Fraud,
Waste, and Abuse in
Federal Programs

Congressional
Relations

Contact:

[Web site: www.gao.gov/fraudnet/fraudnet.htm](http://www.gao.gov/fraudnet/fraudnet.htm)
E-mail: fraudnet@gao.gov
Automated answering system: (800) 424-5454 or (202) 512-7470

[Gloria Jarmon, Managing Director, JarmonG@gao.gov (202) 512-4400](mailto:JarmonG@gao.gov)
U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7125
Washington, D.C. 20548

Public Affairs [Paul Anderson, Managing Director, AndersonP1@gao.gov (202) 512-4800](mailto:AndersonP1@gao.gov)
U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7149
Washington, D.C. 20548