# Transportation Demonstration Grants: DOT Should Develop and Implement a Lessons Learned Plan

**Report:** GAO-26-107841 | **Published:** 2026-03-12 | **Source:** [U.S. Government Accountability Office](https://www.gao.gov/products/gao-26-107841)

---

## Highlights

### What GAO Found

The Department of Transportation (DOT) Strengthening Mobility and 
Revolutionizing Transportation (SMART) grants program funds demonstration 
projects that use advanced transportation technologies, such as autonomous 
vehicles and drones. In the first 3 years of the program, DOT received 1,073 
applications from a variety of community sizes, entity types, and technology 
areas. As of September 2025, DOT has announced awards of around $289 
million, which is 58 percent of the total authorized and appropriated funding for 
the program in the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA), for 135 SMART 
projects. 
While citing challenges that delayed the implementation of their projects, 
recipients GAO interviewed had generally positive views of the SMART program. 
Recipients reported challenges in procuring the necessary technology and 
equipment, which affected their project’s timeframes. As of September 2025, 
most SMART projects were not yet completed, but DOT officials expect many 
projects to be completed by the end of 2026. However, recipients also identified 
positive effects of the SMART program, including that the program allows them to 
test and demonstrate innovative technology solutions. Further, some recipients 
said the program allowed them to speed up the research or project timeframe 
compared with the timeline if they relied on local funding. 
DOT has collected information about SMART projects but has not fully aligned its 
efforts with key practices for a lessons-learned process. The IIJA states that DOT 
should develop a lessons-learned process to identify technologies that can be 
successfully used in future deployments. In addition, GAO has identified key 
practices to building a comprehensive, documented lessons-learned process.  
Key Practices for a Lessons-Learned Process 
 
DOT’s current efforts do not fully align with these practices for lessons learned. 
For example, DOT has not analyzed information it collected from the SMART 
projects to identify lessons learned. DOT officials told GAO they have not 
developed a plan to align future activities with these practices because they were 
focused on awarding grants and not on planning for the analysis of program 
results. Developing and implementing a lessons-learned plan that incorporates 
key practices will help ensure that DOT can identify and share the results of the 
SMART program, particularly as projects are completed and recipients report 
their results to DOT. Without such a plan, DOT could miss opportunities to 
communicate lessons that could help improve the safety and reliability of 
transportation systems more broadly. Also, by better understanding lessons from 
the SMART program projects, communities can benefit from successes and may 
facilitate the adoption of advanced technologies.

### Why GAO Did This Study

In 2021, the IIJA created the SMART 
program to fund demonstration projects 
that use advanced technologies and 
systems to improve transportation 
efficiency and safety. The SMART 
program provides discretionary grants 
that support projects across eight 
technology areas, and recipients 
include state, city, and tribal 
governments. The IIJA authorized and 
appropriated $500 million for the 
program between fiscal years 2022 and 
2026. In February 2026, the 
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2026 
transferred $204.9 million in unobligated 
balances from the SMART grants 
program to support appropriations for 
other purposes. 
The IIJA included a provision in statute 
for GAO to review the SMART program. 
This report addresses the 
characteristics of SMART program 
applicants and projects, perspectives of 
selected recipients on the program, and 
how DOT plans to identify lessons 
learned from the program. GAO 
reviewed DOT data on the applicants 
and projects selected for awards from 
fiscal years 2022 through 2024 and 
interviewed DOT officials on the 
SMART grant program. GAO also 
interviewed 17 selected grant recipients 
reflecting a range of community sizes 
and technology areas, on the program 
and their projects. In addition, GAO 
compared DOT efforts to identify 
lessons learned from the program with 
key practices GAO identified and 
federal guidance for developing lessons 
learned.

### What GAO Recommends

GAO is making a recommendation for 
DOT to develop and implement a 
lessons-learned plan that incorporates 
key practices for the SMART program. 
DOT agreed with our recommendation.

---

DOT Selected Applicants for SMART Awards Across Many
Community Sizes and Technology Areas 9
Selected Recipients Reported Both Delays and Positive
Experiences with the Program 14
DOT Has Not Developed and Implemented a Plan to Identify
Lessons Learned from the SMART Program 19

Recommendation for Executive Action 23

Appendix I Comments from the U.S. Department of Transportation 24

Appendix II GAO Contact and Staff Acknowledgements 25

Tables

Table 1: Strengthening Mobility and Revolutionizing
Transportation Grant Applications and Selected Awards
by Stage and Fiscal Year, from 2022 Through 2024, as of
September 2025 9
Table 2: Stage 1 and Stage 2 Applications Submitted and
Selected Projects, by Community Size, for Fiscal Years
2022 through 2024, as of September 2025 11
Table 3: Strengthening Mobility and Revolutionizing
Transportation (SMART) Application Ratings and
Selected Projects for Fiscal Years 2022 Through 2024 12
Table 4: Strengthening Mobility and Revolutionizing
Transportation Applicants by Entity Type and Total
Funding of Selected Projects for Fiscal Years 2022
Through 2024, as of September 2025 13
Table 5: Strengthening Mobility and Revolutionizing
Transportation Applications and Selected Projects by
Technology Area for Fiscal Years 2022 through 2024, as
of September 2025 14

Figures

*[Figure 1: Strengthening Mobility and Revolutionizing — see original PDF]*
Transportation (SMART) Grant Technology Areas 5
*[Figure 2: Timeline of Select Strengthening Mobility and — see original PDF]*
Revolutionizing Transportation (SMART) Program
Milestones 7
*[Figure 3: Percentage of Strengthening Mobility and — see original PDF]*
Revolutionizing Transportation Grant Funding of Selected
Projects, by Community Size, for Fiscal Years 2022
through 2024, as of September 2025 10
*[Figure 4: Example of Intelligent Sensor Technology System — see original PDF]*
Project Funded with Strengthening Mobility and
Revolutionizing Transportation Grant 17
*[Figure 5: Alaska Drone Inspecting a Bridge for Corrosion — see original PDF]*
*[Figure 6: Selected Key Practices of a Lessons-Learned Process — see original PDF]*
**Abbreviations**

DOT Department of Transportation
IIJA Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act
LiDAR Light Detection and Ranging sensor
SMART Strengthening Mobility and Revolutionizing
Transportation

This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the
United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety
without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain
copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be
necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately.

**441 G St. N.W.**
**Washington, DC 20548**

Letter

March 12, 2026

The Honorable Ted Cruz

Chairman

The Honorable Maria Cantwell
Ranking Member
Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
United States Senate

The Honorable Brett Guthrie

Chairman

The Honorable Frank Pallone, Jr.
Ranking Member
Committee on Energy and Commerce
House of Representatives

The Honorable Sam Graves

Chairman

The Honorable Rick Larsen
Ranking Member
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure
House of Representatives

The United States is investing in advanced technologies, such as
connected infrastructure and advanced aviation systems that have the
potential to modernize and improve the efficiency, performance, and
safety of the nation’s transportation system. In November 2021, the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA) created a new program, the
Strengthening Mobility and Revolutionizing Transportation (SMART)
grants program. [1] According to the Department of Transportation (DOT),
the SMART program aims to drive innovation, create jobs, and support
the deployment of transformative transportation technologies. The
SMART program provides discretionary grants to tribal, state, and city
governments, among other entities, for planning and demonstration
projects using advanced technologies and systems to improve
transportation efficiency and safety. The IIJA states that these grants can
support projects across eight technology areas, including connected and
autonomous vehicles and drones.

1 Pub. L. No. 117-58, § 25005, 135 Stat. 429, 840 (codified at 23 U.S.C. § 502 note).

DOT designed the SMART program as a two-stage grants program.
Stage 1 grants are awarded for planning and prototyping projects, and
stage 2 grants are awarded for scaled-up demonstrations of the original
project. According to DOT, these projects are intended to provide results
that can be replicated and adopted by other interested communities.

The IIJA authorized and appropriated $500 million for SMART grant
awards for fiscal years 2022 through 2026. [2] DOT made stage 1 award
selections for fiscal years 2022, 2023, and 2024; it announced the fiscal
year 2024 stage 2 awards in December 2024. [3] As of September 2025,
DOT announced the selection of 135 projects, totaling $289 million in
SMART funding between fiscal years 2022 and 2024. [4] The first SMART
projects were completed by mid-2025, and as more projects are
completed, recipients are sending final project reports and results to DOT.

The IIJA included a provision for GAO to review DOT’s SMART grants
program and submit a report to Congress. This report examines (1) the
characteristics of SMART program applicants and awardees, (2) selected
recipients’ perspectives on the program, and (3) how DOT plans to
identify lessons learned from the SMART grants program.

To address the first objective, we analyzed DOT data on all SMART
program applications and DOT selections in fiscal years 2022 through
2024. We used the data to identify characteristics of the applicants and of
DOT selections, as well as the characteristics of SMART projects, such
as community size, technology area, and funding amounts awarded. We
included all stage 1 and stage 2 applications and DOT award selections

2 The funds appropriated to the SMART program were initially available until expended.
However, the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2026 transferred $204.9 million in
unobligated balances of the amounts previously appropriated for the SMART grants
program to support appropriations for other purposes. Pub. L. No. 117-75, div. D, tit. I.

3 In March 2025, DOT began reviewing all discretionary award selections for projects
without signed grant agreements, including the SMART grants program, to ensure the
project scopes align with administration priorities, executive orders, and related DOT
orders and memorandums. These executive orders include Exec. Order No. 14154, 90
Fed. Reg. 8353 (Jan. 20, 2025), and Exec. Order No. 14151, 90 Fed. Reg. 8339 (Jan. 20,
2025), among others. A grant agreement is the formal legal instrument of financial
assistance between a federal agency and a recipient. See 2 C.F.R. § 200.1

4 DOT announced fiscal year 2024 SMART awards on December 17, 2024. The 34 stage
1 and eight stage 2 grants totaling $139 million announced in December were included in
the DOT review. As of February 2026, DOT reported the approval of 29 stage 1 grants
and 7 stage 2 grants. According to DOT, the remaining 5 stage 1 projects are still under
agency review and one stage 2 project is canceled.

announced in fiscal years 2022 through 2024 in our analysis. Our
analysis identified minor inconsistencies and errors in the data provided
by DOT, such as incorrect and missing data fields and test records. We
reviewed DOT documents on award selections and announcements and
followed up with DOT to discuss and correct the data. After discussion
with DOT, we made appropriate changes, as needed, to address
discrepancies and inconsistencies in the data DOT provided. On the
basis of this discussion, we determined that the data are reliable for the
purposes of this report.

To address the second objective, we interviewed DOT officials and 17
SMART recipients. To obtain perspectives on the recipients’ experience
with the SMART program and their project outcomes, we conducted
semistructured interviews with 17 of the 59 stage 1 SMART recipients
that were selected in fiscal year 2022. Of these 17, we interviewed all
eight recipients that received both stage 1 grants in fiscal year 2022 and
were selected by DOT to receive stage 2 grants in fiscal year 2024. We
also interviewed nine stage 1 recipients that did not apply for, or were not
selected for, stage 2 grants in fiscal year 2024. These recipients reflect a
range of community sizes, geographies, and technology areas. The
perspectives of these interviewees are not generalizable to all recipients,
but these responses provided a variety of views and informed
perspectives on the SMART program.

To address the third objective, we reviewed DOT documentation, such as
notices of funding opportunity and relevant program guidance, that
described how the SMART program would collect and disseminate
lessons learned from its projects. We also interviewed DOT officials to
understand how they plan to identify and share lessons learned. We also
assessed the extent to which DOT incorporates selected key practices of
a lessons-learned process into its efforts, such as analyzing and
disseminating the information it receives from SMART grant recipients. [5]

We conducted this performance audit from October 2024 to March 2026
in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain

5 We identified six lessons-learned key practices in GAO _, Telecommunications: GSA_
_Needs to Share and Prioritize Lessons Learned to Avoid Future Transition Delays_,
[GAO-14-63 (Washington, D.C.: Dec. 5, 2013); and in](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-14-63) _VA Construction: VA Should_
_Enhance the Lessons-Learned Process for Its Real-Property Donation Pilot Program_,
[GAO-21-133 (Washington, D.C.: Dec. 10, 2020). We excluded one practice, applying](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-21-133)
lessons, from our analysis as we determined that it was not applicable to the SMART
program because project recipients are responsible for applying lessons and not DOT.

#### Background

###### SMART Eligible Entities and Projects

sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.

DOT’s SMART program, which is administered by the Office of the
Assistant Secretary for Research and Technology, provides grants to
eligible public sector agencies (state, regional, and local governments,
and tribal governments, among others) to conduct demonstration
projects. The IIJA required DOT to award up to 40 percent of the SMART
grants funds to projects that primarily benefit large communities, up to 30
percent for midsized communities, and up to 30 percent for rural
communities or regional partnerships. [6]

The SMART program funds projects that demonstrate advanced
technologies that are not widely adopted in transportation systems. Figure
1 shows the eligible technology areas for SMART projects as established
by the IIJA. Applicants must identify at least one of the technology areas
for their project, but a project may address more than one eligible
technology area.

6 For the purposes of the SMART grants program, the IIJA defines a “large community” as
a community with a population of not less than 400,000 individuals, as determined under
the most recent annual estimate of the Bureau of the Census. “Midsized community” is
defined as any community that is not a large community or a rural community. “Rural
community” is defined as a community located in an area that is outside of an urbanized
area, as that term is defined in 49 U.S.C. § 5302(24) (“The term ‘urbanized area’ means
an area encompassing a population of not less than 50,000 people that has been defined
and designated in the most recent decennial census as an ‘urbanized area’ by the
Secretary of Commerce.”). “Regional partnerships” consist of two or more entities that
collectively are larger than a midsized community. Pub. L. No. 117-58, § 25005, 135 Stat.
at 840.

**Figure 1: Strengthening Mobility and Revolutionizing Transportation (SMART) Grant Technology Areas**

###### DOT SMART Program Reporting SMART Program Stages

The IIJA requires that DOT submit a report to Congress that, among other
things, describes the projects funded by the SMART program, assesses
the realized improvements or benefits of the grants, and describes the
lessons learned and recommendations for future deployment strategies of
the technologies. In addition, the IIJA states that DOT shall develop and
regularly update best practices based on, among other information, the
data, lessons learned, and feedback from the SMART recipients.

DOT designed the SMART program as a two-stage grants program.
Stage 1 grants provide funding for projects that plan, refine, and prototype
an innovative transportation concept, and report out on the results. The
stage 1 grants provide recipients between $250,000 and $2 million for
projects. The expected period of performance for stage 1 projects is up to
18 months. Recipients may request approval for an extension to the 18month performance period from DOT if additional time is required to
complete the project.

###### SMART Grants Award Process

According to DOT, at the conclusion of stage 1, recipients should be able
to create a plan to implement an expanded project. Recipients could then
apply for stage 2 of the SMART program or decide not to pursue the
project.

Stage 2 grants provide funds for scaled-up demonstrations of the stage 1
projects. In stage 2, projects are integrated with the existing
transportation system and the concept is refined such that it could be
replicated by others. The stage 2 grants could receive up to $15 million,
and the period of performance for stage 2 projects is up to 3 years. Only
stage 1 recipients, or their designee, could apply for a stage 2 grant.

DOT outlined its process for soliciting, evaluating, and selecting projects
for the SMART grants program in its annual notices of funding
opportunities for the program and its internal evaluation guidance.

- **Solicitation:** DOT published annual notices of funding opportunity for
its stage 1 and stage 2 grants for fiscal years 2022 through 2024.
Eligible entities submit applications to DOT that include applicant
information, project description, budget summary, and other project
information. Applicants self-select their community size, entity type,
and the primary technology area of their project.

- **Evaluation:** DOT initially screens applications to confirm the eligibility
of applicants. Evaluators review and rate applications using criterion
in the notice of funding opportunity. [7] The evaluators reach consensus
on a rating of “highly recommended,” “recommended,” “not
recommended,” or “ineligible” for each application. Then they provide
the consensus ratings to the Senior Review Team—senior officials
selected by the Secretary of Transportation.

- **Selection:** The Senior Review Team, which is composed of officials
from DOT’s operating administrations (e.g. Federal Highway
Administration, Federal Aviation Administration, etc.) and the Office of
the Secretary, decides which applications to advance to the Secretary
of Transportation for final review and approval. All “highly
recommended” applications are advanced for final review, and the
Senior Review Team may include “recommended” applications to
ensure that a sufficient number of applications are on the list to meet
the statutory requirements for applicant community sizes. The

7 Evaluators are DOT officials selected from modal administrations that are subject matter
experts or have some expertise in the technology areas considered for SMART program
grants.

Secretary of Transportation makes the final award decisions and
announces the selected projects.

DOT published the first SMART notice of funding opportunity in
September 2022 and announced the selection of the first stage 1 projects
in March 2023 (see fig. 2). DOT announced stage 1 awards in fiscal years
2023 and 2024. [8] No additional SMART grant awards will be announced
or selected as, on February 3, 2026, the Consolidated Appropriations Act,
2026 transferred $204.9 million in unobligated balances that were
previously appropriated for the SMART program funds to support
appropriations for other purposes. According to DOT, these funds are no
longer available for the SMART program.

**Figure 2: Timeline of Select Strengthening Mobility and Revolutionizing Transportation (SMART) Program Milestones**

Note: The initial period of performance varies among projects, and not all recipients used the allowed
18 months for their stage 1 grants.

8 On August 7, 2025, the President signed Executive Order 14332, Improving Oversight of
Federal Grantmaking, which requires all federal agencies to designate senior political
officials who will have the authority and responsibility to review and approve all
discretionary grant opportunities and pauses all Notices of Funding Opportunities until this
review process is in place, among other requirements for discretionary grants. (90 Fed.
Reg. 38,929 (Aug. 7, 2025)).

###### SMART Grant Reporting and Outreach

DOT collects information on the SMART projects through required plans
and reports submitted by recipients, and through outreach activities and
other communications. These plans and reports include the following:

**An evaluation plan and a data management plan.** DOT requires
recipients to submit an evaluation plan and data management plan
within 90 days of the start of a project. The evaluation plan should
include project goals and measurable performance metrics based on
those goals that DOT can use to assess project success. Additionally,
DOT requires recipients to submit a data management plan that
outlines the relevant data collected during their project. DOT requires
this plan to include all data needed to reproduce significant results
and measure project outcomes and data that could add value to future
deployments;

**Project reports.** DOT requires recipients to submit quarterly reports
over their 18-month period of performance, and the IIJA requires
recipients to submit an implementation report no later than 2 years
after receiving a grant, and annually thereafter until the grant is
expended. [9] The quarterly reports are used to provide updates on
project scope, schedule, and budget. In addition, within 90 days after
the period of performance, DOT requires recipients to submit an
implementation report that describes the project and assesses the
costs and benefits of the project. According to DOT officials, recipients
use information from their evaluation plan and quarterly reports to
create the final report; and

- **Outreach activities.** DOT hosted multiday, in-person conferences for
the SMART program recipients in 2023 and 2024. According to DOT,
officials recorded key takeaways and feedback from recipients about
their projects. In addition, DOT conducted site visits to SMART
projects where they answered technical questions and discussed
project challenges, according to DOT officials.

9 Pub. L. No. 117-578, § 25005(f)(1), 135 Stat. 429, 844 (2021). DOT also collected draft
implementation reports from recipients.

#### DOT Selected Applicants for SMART Awards Across Many Community Sizes and Technology Areas

In the first three years of the program, DOT received applications from a
wide variety of community sizes, entity types, and technology areas.
Likewise, DOT’s selections were spread across applicants and
technologies. DOT received more applications for the SMART program
than there was available funding. Specifically, from fiscal years 2022
through 2024, entities submitted 1,073 applications for the SMART
program, and DOT selected 135 projects to receive grants [10] Of the 59
entities that received stage 1 grants in fiscal year 2022, 28 submitted
applications for the stage 2 grants in fiscal year 2024. DOT selected 8
projects for the stage 2 grants. In total, DOT has announced awards of
over $289 million to SMART projects, which is 58 percent of the $500
million authorized and appropriated in the IIJA for fiscal year 2022
through fiscal year 2026. (See table 1.)

**Table 1: Strengthening Mobility and Revolutionizing Transportation Grant Applications and Selected Awards by Stage and**
**Fiscal Year, from 2022 Through 2024, as of September 2025**

**SMART grant stage** **Number of**
**applications**

**Number of**
**selected projects**

**Total amount of selected**

**awards (in millions)**

FY22 stage 1 389 59 $94.8

FY23 stage 1 348 34 $54.5

FY24 stage 1 308 [a] 34 $54.4

FY24 stage 2 28 8 $85.5

**Total** **1,073** **135** **$ 289.2**

Legend: SMART=Strengthening Mobility and Revolutionizing Transportation

FY=fiscal year

Source: GAO analysis of DOT data. ǀ GAO-26-107841

a DOT told us that they received an additional 23 fiscal year 2024 stage 1 applications that were
ineligible for the SMART program. These applications are not reflected in this table

**Community sizes.** DOT received applications for projects from all
community sizes for fiscal years 2022 through 2024. The IIJA requires
DOT to award not more than 40 percent of SMART funding to projects
that benefit large communities and not more than 30 percent each to

10 The application data showed that DOT determined 34 applications were ineligible for the
SMART program. DOT officials informed us that the fiscal year 2024 stage 1 applications
included 23 ineligible applications. However, those 23 applications were not included in
the data provided by DOT and are not reflected in the total applications in this report.

midsized communities and rural or regional partnerships. [11] DOT’s award
selections generally reflected this requirement for all fiscal years (see fig.
3).

**Figure 3: Percentage of Strengthening Mobility and Revolutionizing Transportation**
**Grant Funding of Selected Projects, by Community Size, for Fiscal Years 2022**
**through 2024, as of September 2025**

There was some variation in DOT’s selection of projects among
applicants across community sizes. Our analysis shows that midsized
communities submitted the most applications for stage 1 grants. In
addition, we found that rural communities submitted more than twice as
many applications as regional partnerships and received about the same
total award selections and grant funding. DOT officials told us they
considered the regional partnership and rural community applications
together per the statute. [12] DOT selections also generally reflect the
community size requirements when selecting stage 2 grants. See table 2
for additional information on DOT selected awards compared with
applications.

11 The IIJA requires the SMART funding amounts for the community size not to exceed the
stated percentages for the total appropriated SMART funding through fiscal year 2026.
We did not evaluate the amounts reflected in the finalized grant agreements for all fiscal

years.

12 Regional partnerships consist of two or more entities that are, collectively, larger than a
midsized community.

**Table 2: Stage 1 and Stage 2 Applications Submitted and Selected Projects, by Community Size, for Fiscal Years 2022**
**through 2024, as of September 2025**

**Community size** **Large** **Midsized** **Regional** **Rural**

**Stage 1 awards**

Applications 313 459 81 180

Selected projects 44 41 23 19

Funding amount $77,085,569 $62,229,244 $35,433,280 $28,887,723

**Stage 2 awards**

Applications 14 8 3 3

Selected projects 4 2 1 1

Funding amount $39,849,730 $26,568,169 $6,599,400 $12,435,301

**Total applications** **327** **467** **84** **183**

**Total selected projects** **48** **43** **24** **20**

**Total Funding** **$ 116,935,299** **$ 88,797,413** **$ 42,032,680** **$ 41,323,024**

Source: GAO analysis of Department of Transportation application data. ǀ GAO-26-107841

Note: Twelve entities that applied for SMART grants in fiscal years 2022 and 2023 were identified as
“unclear” in community size. None of these entities was selected for a SMART grant. These 12
applications are not included in the table above.

Most DOT selections went to “highly recommended” projects, and DOT
also selected grants for some projects that were “recommended” by
evaluators. Of the 1,073 applications submitted for the SMART program,
DOT rated 235 projects as “highly recommended.” DOT selected 103
(less than half) of these “highly recommended” applications to receive
SMART grants (see table 3). According to DOT officials, “recommended”
applications may be considered to ensure that all statutory requirements
can be met, such as allocating funds across different community sizes
and technology areas.

**Table 3: Strengthening Mobility and Revolutionizing Transportation (SMART) Application Ratings and Selected Projects for**
**Fiscal Years 2022 Through 2024**

**Selected**

**SMART**

**projects**

**Not selected**

**as a SMART**

**projects** **project** **Total applications**

Highly recommended 103 132 235
applications

Recommended applications 32 376 408

Other applications [a] 0 430 430

**Total** **135** **938** **1,073**

Source: GAO Analysis based on Department of Transportation data. ǀ GAO-26-107841

a Other applications include those that were not recommended, were rejected, or were ineligible for
the SMART grants program.

**Types of entities.** Over half of all SMART program applicants selfdesignated as “political subdivision of a state” and received the largest
share of awards (see table 4). [13] This category of entities includes cities,
towns, county governments, special districts, airports, utilities, and similar
units of local government, and covers different community sizes. For
example, New York City, a large community, and Talladega, Alabama, a
small rural community, as well as fire and police departments and
regional port authorities designated themselves as a political subdivision
of a state. [14]

13 The term “political subdivision of a state” is not defined in the SMART grants statute, but
DOT defines it as: “a unit of government created under the authority of State law.”

14 New York City has over 8 million people and Talladega, AL has a population of not quite
16,000.

103 132 235

**Table 4: Strengthening Mobility and Revolutionizing Transportation Applicants by Entity Type and Total Funding of Selected**
**Projects for Fiscal Years 2022 Through 2024, as of September 2025**

**Entity type defined by**

**Statute**

**Total applicants** **Total selected projects** **Total selected project**

**funding (in millions)**

Political subdivision of a state 621 51 $ 108.8

State 209 36 $ 72.8

Public transit agency or
authority

Metropolitan planning
organization

164 31 $ 82.7

64 11 $ 15.9

Tribal government 10 5 $ 7.5

Public toll authority 3 1 $ 1.5

Group applicants 2 0 $ 

**Grand total** **1,073** **135** **$ 289.2**

Source: GAO analysis of Department of Transportation data. ǀ GAO-26-107841

Note: Numbers may not total due to rounding.

**Technology areas** . DOT selected SMART projects in all eight technology
areas. Applicants self-designated their technology categories and many
designated their projects as incorporating three or more technology
categories. Of the awards, sensor-based infrastructure projects received
the most awards since fiscal year 2022. These projects included safety
technologies for bridge, rail, highway, city congestion and traffic, and
weather monitoring systems, among others. (See table 5).

**Table 5: Strengthening Mobility and Revolutionizing Transportation Applications and Selected Projects by Technology Area**
**for Fiscal Years 2022 through 2024, as of September 2025**

**Technology**

**Total**

**applications**

**Total**

**selected**

**projects**

**Total selected project**

**applications** **projects** **funding (in millions)**

Sensor-based infrastructure 286 35 $ 68.5

Smart traffic technology and
signals

Integration of intelligent
transportation systems

268 21 $ 33.5

199 32 $ 65.1

Innovative aviation technologies 109 17 $ 50.6

Connected vehicles 64 14 $ 22.8

Coordinated automation 63 2 $ 3.9

Smart grid 49 6 $ 16.6

Commercial delivery and
logistics

35 8 $ 28.1

**Grand Total** **1,073** **135** **$ 289.1**

Source: GAO analysis of Department of Transportation data. ǀ GAO-26-107841

Note: The technology areas are based on the primary technology identified by the SMART program
applicants.

#### Selected Recipients Reported Both Delays and Positive Experiences with the Program

###### DOT Expects Most SMART Projects to Be Completed in 2026, After Some Delays

As of September 2025, most SMART grants were ongoing, but DOT
officials expect many projects will be completed by the end of 2026.
According to DOT, as of September 2025, 31 of the 59 stage 1 SMART
projects selected in fiscal year 2022 were completed (i.e. have reached
the end of their period of performance). Of these, 15 recipients submitted
a final implementation report to DOT on completion of their projects. The
remaining projects selected in fiscal year 2022, and all projects selected
in fiscal year 2023, were ongoing. DOT officials told us they expect these
remaining projects will be finished by the end of 2026. In addition, most of
the stage 1 and stage 2 projects selected in fiscal year 2024 are ongoing.

According to DOT, most stage 1 recipients requested extensions to the
18-month period of performance to complete their projects. DOT officials
told us that 47 of the 59 recipients of fiscal year 2022 awards requested
extensions. [15] DOT officials stated that an extension may range from 6
months to 12 months and is discussed within the final 90 days of the
original performance period. DOT officials told us they also allow the
recipient to modify the project’s scope to meet the new timeline for the
extension.

Recipients told us that they had difficulty completing projects within the
18-month period of performance for the stage 1 awards. Twelve of the 17
selected recipients we interviewed told us that the period of performance
was too short to complete their stage 1 project and reported a variety of
delays that affected the project’s timeframes. For example, seven
recipients we interviewed cited challenges in the contracting and
procurement processes that caused delays in implementing their projects.
Three of these recipients reported that delays resulted from challenges in
obtaining local government approval for contracts for consultants and
other partners. One recipient told us that meeting city and county
requirements and receiving approval from the local county board delayed
the implementation of their project. In addition, some recipients reported
delays because of challenges in procuring the necessary technology and
equipment through vendors or technical issues related to the technology
used for the project.

According to DOT officials, the 18-month schedule was aggressive, but
they explained that stage 1 grants were intended to support a shorter
planning and prototyping of innovative, advanced technologies. These
prototype projects are intended to demonstrate the viability for the
technology to be used in a scaled, larger project in stage 2. In addition,
DOT officials told us that some recipients were able to meet the
timeframe to submit stage 2 applications for the fiscal year 2024 grants.
For fiscal year 2024 stage 2 grants, 28 stage 1 recipients applied for
stage 2, which exceeded DOT expectations, according to DOT officials.

15 According to DOT officials, no fiscal year 2023 recipients requested extensions, as of
September 2025, as they have not reached the current period of performance dates.

###### Selected Recipients Reported the Program Had a Positive Effect on Their Ability to Demonstrate and Test Transportation Technologies

All 17 recipients we interviewed identified positive effects of the SMART
program on the projects undertaken with the grants, as well as the
benefits of the two-stage grant process. The recipients we interviewed
cited various benefits of the DOT SMART grants program, including
allowing them to test and demonstrate innovative technology solutions for
transportation systems.

**Test innovative technologies:** Nine recipients reported that the
SMART program allows them to test and demonstrate innovative or
advanced technology solutions for their communities. One recipient
stated that the SMART grant will allow them to demonstrate that
drones can be used to solve the problem of delivering medications to
rural areas, which is currently done with difficult and expensive
delivery options. Another recipient told us that the SMART program
gave communities the opportunity to test cutting-edge sensors and
connected vehicle technology that provides warnings to drivers and
pedestrians and automatically activates crossing signals. In addition,
another recipient told us that the SMART program provided them with
the best opportunity to test advanced technologies to determine the
best options and to demonstrate the technology to support future
expansion in their community.

Recipients also noted that the program provides them with the
flexibility to adjust stage 1 projects before starting a stage 2 grant.
One recipient noted that the SMART program allowed them to adjust
the technology solution or scope of the project for stage 2 if their
original approach did not work. For example, one recipient reported
that one of the sensor technologies tested was replaced at some
locations due to supplier instability. The recipient reported that these
changes to a more reliable sensor would allow for a cost-effective,
maintainable, and scalable deployment for a broader rollout across
the region.

**Expedite project implementation:** Seven recipients we interviewed
told us their SMART grant helped them speed up the research or
project timeframe compared with the timeline if they relied only on
other sources of funds.

For example, the Nashville Department of Transportation and
Multimodal Infrastructure used a SMART grant to install Light
Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) sensors at selected intersections in
the city to enhance driver and pedestrian safety. These sensors
detect vehicles, pedestrians, and bicyclists at intersections and readily
collect data on traffic patterns, collisions, and near-misses that,

according to officials, have historically been difficult to gather.
According to officials, they used the data collected to implement
safety measures including changing the timing of traffic signals and
installing pedestrian warning signals at specific intersections. These
officials told us that these efforts have resulted in fewer near misses
with pedestrians and reduced speeding at the selected intersections.
Figure 4 shows a visual display of the traffic information collected by
its LiDAR sensors that monitor the number and speed of vehicles at
intersections, as well as buses and pedestrians. Nashville officials told
us that the grant enabled them to test these technologies sooner and
more broadly than they could have using only local funds.

**Figure 4: Example of Intelligent Sensor Technology System Project Funded with**
**Strengthening Mobility and Revolutionizing Transportation Grant**

Furthermore, six recipients reported that SMART grants provided
funding for projects that otherwise may not have started because of
competing transportation priorities for state or local funds. For
example, one recipient we interviewed used the SMART grant to test
smart traffic signals to address safety issues at intersections and
prioritize movement of transit and emergency vehicles to better
manage traffic and enhance safety. According to the recipient, the
SMART grant was well-suited to helping them advance this

technological solution because it sped up research and
implementation. Without the grant, the recipient expected the city
would implement the technology more slowly, as this project would
compete with other transportation priorities for funds.

- **Deploy tested technology: I** n addition, all 17 recipients we
interviewed cited the benefits of the SMART program’s two-stage
award process. For example, some recipients noted that the program
allowed them to demonstrate the proof-of-concept of the technologies
in stage 1 before investing the funds to deploy the technology for a
larger project in stage 2.

Ten recipients we interviewed told us the stage 1 grant allowed them
to demonstrate the viability of the technology, which some recipients
said would support the request for additional funding in stage 2. For
example, the Alaska Department of Transportation and Public
Facilities used a SMART grant to deploy drones in various
communities throughout the state to conduct inspections of
infrastructure, such as bridges, ice roads, and multimodal
infrastructure and support facilities. Figure 5 shows the drone used to
inspect a bridge.

**Figure 5: Alaska Drone Inspecting a Bridge for Corrosion**

#### DOT Has Not Developed and Implemented a Plan to Identify Lessons Learned from the SMART Program

According to the recipient, the SMART project allowed them to reduce the
cost and time needed to conduct infrastructure surveys and inspections
by using drones instead of dispatching an inspector to rural, remote
locations. It also allowed them to track and analyze infrastructure in new
ways, and they anticipate that expanding the project will result in reducing
maintenance costs by identifying issues earlier and increasing the
reliability and safety of state infrastructure. The recipient told us that the
success of stage 1 helped them expand the drone project for stage 2 and
invest heavily in state-wide deployment of drone technology.

As previously mentioned, the SMART program was established to
conduct demonstration projects of advanced technologies and systems to
improve transportation efficiency and safety. According to DOT, these
projects are meant to help transportation practitioners by identifying
advanced technologies that can be successfully used across the country.
To do this, the IIJA states that DOT should develop a lessons-learned
process with program recommendations. [16] In addition, federal regulations
require agencies to share lessons learned to improve grant program
outcomes and foster the adoption of promising practices. [17]

A lessons-learned process is a systematic means for agencies to learn
from specific events and make decisions about when and how to use that
knowledge to change behavior. [18] We have previously reported that
adopting a lessons-learned process can be particularly important when an
agency is implementing a new program, such as the SMART program. [19]
We have also reported that collecting lessons learned throughout the
course of an event, rather than just at the end, can help to ensure that
lessons learned are captured as close as possible to the learning

16 The IIJA also requires DOT to submit a report to Congress in 2025, which includes
information on lessons learned from the SMART program. According to DOT officials, the
report is undergoing internal agency review, as of December 2025.

17 2 C.F.R. § 200.301 (a). This provision is in the Office of Management and Budget’s
Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for
Federal Awards 2 C.F.R. Part 200 (2024). DOT has generally adopted these provisions in
regulation. 2 C.F.R. § 1201.1 (2024).

18 GAO-21-133.

19 [See previously used at GAO-21-133;](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-21-133) _and VA Leasing: VA Should Systematically Identify_
_and Address Challenges in Its Efforts to Lease Space from Academic Affiliates_,
[GAO-26-107821 (Washington, D.C.: Nov. 25, 2025).](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-26-107821)

opportunity. [20] In prior work, we identified key practices to building a
comprehensive, documented lessons-learned process (see fig. 6).

**Figure 6: Selected Key Practices of a Lessons-Learned Process**

Note: This graphic was initially published in 2020 in GAO, _VA Construction: VA Should Enhance the_
_Lessons-Learned Process for Its Real-Property Donation Pilot Program_ [, GAO-21-133 (Washington,](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-21-133)
D.C.: Dec. 10, 2020) and was based on additional prior work. We did not include the final practice–
apply key lessons–here because project recipients are responsible for applying lessons and not the
Department of Transportation.

While DOT has taken steps related to some of these key practices, such
as collecting information, gaps remain. Further, DOT program officials we
interviewed pointed to the need to develop lessons learned and
articulated several potential future activities to do so. However, DOT’s
current activities do not fully align with key practices, and DOT does not
have a documented plan to align its future activities with them. Such a
plan would include a process for collecting, analyzing, validating,
documenting, and disseminating lessons learned from the SMART
program. Specifically:

**Collecting information.** DOT collected information from recipients
through required reports, including quarterly and implementation reports.
DOT officials told us that this includes collecting a summary report that
describes the successes and challenges of each project, results of the
performance measures used for the project, whether the recipient found
the technology they tested was feasible, and lessons learned identified by
recipients.

20 GAO, _Customs and Border Protection: Actions Needed to Enhance Acquisition_
_Management and Knowledge Sharing,_ [GAO-23-105472 (Washington, D.C.: April 25,](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-23-105472)
2023).

In addition, DOT also collects information about projects through outreach
activities such as visiting project sites and hosting conferences with
project recipients. For example, DOT officials told us they hosted SMART
Summits where they gather information from attendees and use
stakeholder surveys to outline needed improvements to the program.

**Analyzing information.** DOT officials told us that they have not yet
analyzed the information collected from the SMART projects but intend to
do so as they receive more final grant implementation reports and project
results. DOT officials said it may be challenging to analyze information
across projects to identify lessons learned because the location,
community size, and technology of each project vary. Further, they said
each recipient develops specific goals and performance metrics, making
comparisons across projects difficult. They stated that they intend to
aggregate project results once they receive more implementation reports
for each SMART project which they said should allow them to better
understand lessons learned. However, they could not describe how they
plan to further develop and implement a plan to identify lessons learned
from individual projects, for the SMART grants program overall, or how
lessons could be applied to other projects.

**Validating lessons.** DOT officials stated they intend to validate projectspecific lessons learned that are identified by recipients by presenting at
summits or conferences that practitioners attend, a process they have
used in the past. For example, DOT officials said they discussed early
lessons learned at the 2024 Intelligent Transportation Society of America
conference where they received useful feedback from participants. DOT
officials acknowledged that there may be other methods to validate
lessons learned, which could include hosting small group discussions with
recipients and subject matter experts, but they have no defined plans to
do so.

**Documenting lessons.** DOT officials told us that each SMART recipient
is required to document individual lessons learned on their project and to
submit those lessons to DOT officials as part of their final reports.
However, DOT officials told us that they have not yet developed and
implemented a plan to document the overarching lessons they may
identify by analyzing and validating lessons learned across these
projects.

**Disseminating lessons.** DOT officials told us they intend to disseminate
lessons learned through discussions at SMART Summits and by making
information available on the SMART program website. For example,

#### Conclusions

according to officials, from July 2022 through May 2025, DOT officials
participated in 45 events that included recipients. Officials told us they
provide information on the SMART program through presentations at
these meetings as well as through informal discussions with practitioners.
In addition, DOT plans to make information available online, including
developing a searchable website grouped by type of technology used that
includes the lessons learned from each project. This effort would
potentially result in 127 stage 1 and future stage 2 project reports posted
for others to search and review. While these efforts would be helpful in
sharing lessons learned, DOT may not disseminate valuable and
important lessons learned to key stakeholders without completing a plan
that incorporates the previously identified key practices.

DOT officials noted that they have not yet developed a plan for identifying
lessons learned from the SMART program. Officials acknowledged the
need for such a plan but told us they have focused on awarding and
supporting recipients rather than planning the analysis of program results.
In addition, according to officials, staff turnover in the SMART program
has caused staff to spend additional time on administrative tasks. For
example, according to DOT officials, all original staff members of the
program have left since its inception, and a staff member who worked
closely with many of the recipients left the program. Also, officials noted
that, as of September 2025, the SMART program team is comprised of
four staff members, including two new hires. Developing and
implementing a lessons-learned plan would help ensure that lessons are
not lost and that the continuity of an established process is maintained,
regardless of staffing or program changes.

According to DOT, the purpose of the SMART program is to share results
with other communities that can learn from these demonstration projects.
While funds are no longer available for future SMART projects,
developing and implementing a lessons-learned plan that incorporates
key practices will help ensure that DOT can identify and share
demonstrated results from the SMART program. Without such a plan,
DOT could miss opportunities to identify and share lessons that are likely
to help communities benefit from successes and avoid pitfalls in the
adoption of advanced technologies meant to improve the safety and
reliability of their transportation systems.

The SMART program aims to drive innovation and support the
deployment of various advanced technologies to improve transportation
safety and efficiency across communities. The results of these projects,
including the lessons learned from the implementation of these

#### Recommendation for Executive Action Agency Comments

technologies, could be far reaching. DOT told us that it intends to identify
and share lessons learned from the SMART projects. However, while
DOT has collected information from recipients on their SMART projects, it
has not fully aligned its activities with key practices of a lessons-learned
process and has not developed a plan for identifying the lessons learned
from the program in the future.

By doing so, DOT could effectively inform efforts to develop and deploy
advanced transportation technologies. As a result, DOT may improve the
adoption of these innovative and advanced technologies intended to
transform the transportation system across the country.

The Secretary of Transportation should direct the Assistant Secretary for
Research and Technology to develop and implement a lessons-learned
plan that incorporates key practices including analyzing, validating,
documenting, and disseminating the lessons learned from the SMART
program. (Recommendation 1)

We provided a draft of this report to the Department of Transportation for
its review and comment. In its comments, reproduced in appendix I, DOT
agreed with our recommendation and provided technical comments,
which we incorporated as appropriate.

We are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional
committees, the Secretary of Transportation, and other interested parties.
In addition, the report is available at no charge on the GAO website at
[http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this](http://www.gao.gov/)
[report, please contact me at (202) 512-2834 or RepkoE@gao.gov.](mailto:RepkoE@gao.gov)
Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Media
Relations may be found on the last page of this report. GAO staff who
made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix II.

Elizabeth Repko
Director, Physical Infrastructure

**Appendix I: Comments from the U.S.**
**Department of Transportation**
## Appendix I: Comments from the U.S. Department of Transportation

**Appendix II: GAO Contact and Staff**
## Appendix II: GAO Contact and Staff Acknowledgements Acknowledgements

#### GAO Contact Staff Acknowledgements

[Elizabeth Repko, (202) 512-2834 or RepkoE@gao.gov](mailto:RepkoE@gao.gov)

In addition to the contact named above, John Stambaugh (Assistant
Director), John F. Miller (Analyst in Charge), Virginia Chanley, Emily
Crofford, Kamala Mullur, Josh Ormond, Paras Sharma, Todd Schartung,
Sandra Sokol, and Michelle Weathers made key contributions to this
report.

##### GAO’s Mission Obtaining Copies of GAO Reports and Testimony

###### Order by Phone

##### Connect with GAO To Report Fraud, Waste, and Abuse in Federal Programs Media Relations Congressional Relations General Inquiries

The Government Accountability Office, the audit, evaluation, and investigative
arm of Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting its constitutional
responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the
federal government for the American people. GAO examines the use of public
funds; evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides analyses,
recommendations, and other assistance to help Congress make informed
oversight, policy, and funding decisions. GAO’s commitment to good government
is reflected in its core values of accountability, integrity, and reliability.

The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is
[through our website. Each weekday afternoon, GAO posts on its website newly](https://www.gao.gov/)
[released reports, testimony, and correspondence. You can also subscribe to](https://www.gao.gov/subscribe/index.php)
GAO’s email updates to receive notification of newly posted products.

The price of each GAO publication reflects GAO’s actual cost of production and
distribution and depends on the number of pages in the publication and whether
the publication is printed in color or black and white. Pricing and ordering
[information is posted on GAO’s website, https://www.gao.gov/ordering.htm.](https://www.gao.gov/ordering.htm)

Place orders by calling (202) 512-6000, toll free (866) 801-7077, or
TDD (202) 512-2537.

Orders may be paid for using American Express, Discover Card, MasterCard,
Visa, check, or money order. Call for additional information.

[Connect with GAO on X, LinkedIn, Instagram, and YouTube.](https://x.com/usgao)
[Subscribe to our Email Updates. Listen to our Podcasts.](https://www.gao.gov/about/contact-us/stay-connected)
Visit GAO on the web at https://www.gao.gov.

Contact FraudNet:

Website: [https://www.gao.gov/about/what-gao-does/fraudnet](https://www.gao.gov/about/what-gao-does/fraudnet)

Automated answering system: (800) 424-5454

Sarah Kaczmarek, Managing Director, Media@gao.gov

David A. Powner, Acting Managing Director, CongRel@gao.gov

[https://www.gao.gov/about/contact-us](https://www.gao.gov/about/contact-us)

Please Print on Recycled Paper.