# Private Dental and Vision Insurance: Market Concentration Varied Among States

**Report:** GAO-26-107787 | **Published:** 2026-03-09 | **Source:** [U.S. Government Accountability Office](https://www.gao.gov/products/gao-26-107787)

---

**March 2026**

**United** **States** **Government Accountability** **Office**
### Report to Congressional Requesters

# PRIVATE DENTAL AND VISION INSURANCE Market Concentration Varied Among States

A 

[For more information, contact: John Dicken at dickenj@gao.gov](mailto:dickenj@gao.gov)

**What GAO Found**

The concentration of private, stand-alone dental and vision insurance markets
varied among states across both the group and individual insurance markets,
according to 2024 enrollment data from the National Association of Insurance
Commissioners (NAIC), the most recent available at the time of our analysis. The
concentration of a market refers to the degree to which a small number of
companies control a large part of the market. Across all states, the combined
market share of the three largest insurers in each state ranged from about 38 to
about 98 percent of enrollment for the dental group market, and from about 41
percent to about 96 percent for the vision group market (see table).

**2024 Group Market Share for the Three Largest and Single Largest Stand-Alone**
**Dental and Vision Insurers**

**Range of** **Median** **Range of** **Median**
**market share** **market share** **market share** **market share**
**of three** **of three** **of single** **of single**
**largest** **largest** **largest** **largest**
**insurers** **insurers** **insurer** **insurer**
**(percentage)** **(percentage)** **(percentage)** **(percentage)**

**Median**

**market share**
**of single**
**largest**
**insurer**
**(percentage)**

**Median**

**market share**

**of three**
**largest**
**insurers**
**(percentage)**

**Range of**
**market share**
**of single**
**largest**
**insurer**
**(percentage)**

**Median**

**number of**
**insurers per**
**state**

Dental group
market

Vision group
market

37.9 – 97.5 66.8 13.6 – 95.1 38.0 39

41.2 – 95.5 77.4 15.8 – 81.9 40.9 28

Source: GAO analysis of data from the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC). | GAO-26-107787

Note: Market share for each state is based on the total number of individuals insured as of December
31, 2024, as reported by insurers to NAIC. Data from Massachusetts are excluded from the dental
insurance market analysis.

Vertical integration exists when a company buys into new lines of business in its
supply chain that would otherwise be owned by other companies. GAO did not
find aggregate data on the extent of vertical integration in the dental or vision
insurance markets. Interviewees from the dental industry that GAO spoke with
said vertical integration in the dental insurance market is limited, with one
interviewee noting that vertical integration in the dental industry is only a recent
development. Some interviewees from the vision industry commented that
vertical integration exists in the vision insurance market, including insurer
ownership of provider offices, lens and frame manufacturers, and eyewear retail
brands.

Limited information was available to assess the effects of concentration and
vertical integration in private dental and vision insurance markets. GAO found
two peer-reviewed studies that discussed the effects of concentration of dental
insurance markets, including reduced reimbursements for dental services paid by
insurers to providers in more concentrated markets. Some of the interviewees
from the dental and vision industries that GAO spoke with shared
nongeneralizable observations about the effects of concentration and vertical
integration based on their experiences, including limiting providers’ ability to
negotiate contracts and reimbursement with insurers in concentrated markets.
Some dental industry interviewees noted a lack of opportunity to evaluate the
effects of vertical integration due to limited instances of vertical integration
among dental insurers.

**Why GAO Did This Study**

The market for private health insurance
in the United States is highly
concentrated, which may reduce
competition. Concentrated markets may
also exist within private dental and
vision insurance, which may be sold
separately from health insurance. About
one in four Americans had such stand
alone dental or vision insurance in
2024, according to data from NAIC and
the Census Bureau. In addition, vertical
integration may exist within these
markets. Studies suggest vertical
integration may result in efficiencies and
cost savings but may also reduce
competition in a market.

GAO was asked to review concentration
of and vertical integration in dental and
vision insurance markets. This report
describes (1) the concentration of and
vertical integration in private dental and
vision insurance markets; and (2) what
is known about the effects of
concentration and vertical integration on
competition in private dental and vision
insurance markets.

GAO analyzed 2024 enrollment data
from NAIC on fully insured, stand-alone
dental and vision plans to determine
insurer market share by state. GAO
also conducted a literature review to
examine peer-reviewed studies
published in the last 10 years. In
addition, GAO interviewed a nongeneralizable sample of seven
stakeholder groups representing dental
and vision insurers, dental and vision
care providers, and purchasers of
dental and vision care plans. GAO also
interviewed a dental industry subject
matter expert who recently published a
peer-reviewed study on market
concentration.

For our report findings based on NAIC
data, we provided a draft of these
findings to NAIC for third-party review.
NAIC had no comments.

**United States Government Accountability Office**

Concentration of Private Dental and Vision Insurance Markets
Varies by State and Vertical Integration Is Limited in Dental
Markets 7

Limited Information Is Available to Assess the Effects of
Concentration and Vertical Integration on Competition in Private
Dental and Vision Insurance Markets 17
Third-Party Views 19

Appendix I Market Share for the Single Largest Stand-Alone Insurer and Number of
Insurers by State in the Group and Individual Dental Insurance Markets
(2024) 20

Appendix II Market Share for the Single Largest Stand-Alone Insurer and Number of
Insurers by State in the Group and Individual Vision Insurance Markets
(2024) 24

Appendix III GAO Contact and Staff Acknowledgments 28

Tables

Table 1: 2024 Market Share for the Three Largest and Single
Largest Stand-Alone Dental Insurers and the Median
Number of Stand-Alone Dental Insurers 8
Table 2: 2024 Market Share for the Three Largest and Single
Largest Stand-Alone Vision Insurers and the Median
Number of Stand-Alone Vision Insurers 13
Table 3: Market Share for the Single Largest Stand-Alone Insurer
and Number of Insurers by State in the Group Dental
Insurance Market (2024) 20
Table 4: Market Share for the Single Largest Stand-Alone Insurer
and Number of Insurers by State in the Individual Dental
Insurance Market (2024) 21
Table 5: Market Share for the Single Largest Stand-Alone Insurer
and Number of Insurers by State in the Group Vision
Insurance Market (2024) 24

Figures

Table 6: Market Share for the Single Largest Stand-Alone Insurer
and Number of Insurers by State in the Individual Vision
Insurance Market (2024) 25

*[Figure removed from text conversion]*
Stand-Alone Dental Insurers in the Group Insurance
Market (2024) 9
*[Figure removed from text conversion]*
Stand-Alone Dental Insurers in the Individual Insurance
Market (2024) 10
*[Figure removed from text conversion]*
Stand-Alone Vision Insurers in the Group Insurance
Market (2024) 14
*[Figure removed from text conversion]*
Stand-Alone Vision Insurers in the Individual Insurance
Market (2024) 15

**Abbreviations**

NAIC National Association of Insurance Commissioners

HHI Herfindahl-Hirschman Index

This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the
United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety
without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain
copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be
necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately.

**441 G St. N.W.**
**Washington, DC 20548**

Letter

March 9, 2026

The Honorable Brett Guthrie

Chairman
Committee on Energy and Commerce
House of Representatives

The Honorable H. Morgan Griffith
Chairman

Subcommittee on Health
Committee on Energy and Commerce
House of Representatives

The Honorable Earl L. “Buddy” Carter
House of Representatives

Private health insurance, such as that provided through an employer, is
the most common source of health insurance coverage in the United
States. Historically, the market for private health insurance in the United
States has been highly concentrated, meaning a small number of insurers
enroll most of the people in a given market. [1] Concentrated markets may
also exist within private dental or vision insurance, which may be sold to
consumers separately from health insurance. Markets can become more
concentrated through insurance company consolidation, such as through
mergers and acquisitions, or when companies exit the market leaving
fewer remaining players. Studies have suggested that highly
concentrated health insurance markets may indicate less competition and
could thus affect consumers’ choices of insurers as well as the premiums
they pay. [2]

As with market concentration, vertical integration may exist within private
dental and vision insurance. Vertical integration occurs when a company
buys into new lines of business in its supply chain that would otherwise

1 For more information, see GAO, _Private Health Insurance: Market Concentration_
_Generally Increased from 2011 through 2022_ [, GAO-25-107194 (Washington, D.C.: Nov.](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-25-107194)
14, 2024).

2 In 2022, the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office of the Assistant Secretary
for Planning and Evaluation conducted a literature review that examined trends and
effects of concentration in health care markets, including health insurance markets. See
RAND Corporation, _Environmental Scan on Consolidation Trends and Impacts in Health_
_Care Markets_ (Santa Monica, Calif.: Aug. 2022).

be owned by other companies. Some insurers in the dental and vision
industries have vertically integrated by, for example, buying into provider
practices, laboratories, manufacturing, and other related businesses.
Studies within the health care industry have suggested that, while vertical
integration may result in efficiencies and cost savings, it may also reduce
competition. [3]

There are questions about the extent of concentration and vertical
integration in dental and vision insurance markets and any effects on
consumers and providers. You asked us to examine concentration of and
vertical integration in these markets. In this report, we describe:

1. the concentration of and vertical integration in private dental and
vision insurance markets; and

2. what is known about the effects of concentration and vertical
integration on competition in private dental and vision insurance
markets.

To describe the concentration of and vertical integration in private dental
and vision insurance markets, we analyzed 2024 state-level enrollment
data from dental and vision insurers as collected by the National
Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC). These data capture the
total number of individuals insured as of December 31, 2024, by private
insurers offering fully insured, stand-alone dental and vision plans

3 See George Tewfik, Dennis Grech, Linda Laham, Faraz Chaudhry, and Rotem
Naftalovich, “The Risks and Benefits of Physician Practice Acquisition and Consolidation:
A Narrative Review of Peer-Reviewed Publications Between 2009 and 2022 in the United
States,” _Journal of Multidisciplinary Healthcare_, vol. 17 (2024). See also Jose Ignacio
Cuesta, Carlos Noton, and Benjamin Vatter, “Vertical Integration Between Hospitals and
Insurers,” Working Paper No. 4001, Stanford Graduate School of Business (2019);
Sanford J. Grossman and Oliver D. Hart, “The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory
of Vertical and Lateral Integration,” _The Journal of Political Economy_, vol. 94, no. 4 (1986);
and Department of Justice and Federal Trade Commission, _Merger Guidelines_
(Washington, D.C.: Dec. 18, 2023).

purchased separately from health insurance. [4] These data were the most
recent available at the time of our analysis.

For each state’s market, we counted insurers as participating in a market
if they had enrollment in that market. [5] We did not count insurers that
offered coverage in a market but did not have any enrollment. Because
there can be multiple insurers within a market that share a single parent
company, we aggregated such insurers to the parent-company level. If
there was no parent company, we analyzed the data by the individual
insurers. [6] We did this to more fully account for the portion of the market
held by each parent company. We calculated state-level market share for
insurers in each of the 50 states and the District of Columbia by
calculating the ratio of enrollment for each insurer in a state to the total
enrollment in that state. [7] We calculated market share separately for
dental and vision insurance, as well as for group and individual

4 NAIC receives filings from companies required to file with state insurance departments.
According to NAIC, not all insurers are required to file with state insurance departments.
For example, companies that do not exceed certain thresholds in annual premiums
collected may not be required to file. In addition, California is unique in that it is the only
state with two separate agencies that oversee health insurance, and this affects the
state’s filing requirements. While many health insurers in California file with the California
Department of Insurance, some insurers are required to file with the California Department
of Managed Health Care. In 2024, about five million individuals were enrolled in private
stand-alone dental plans and about eight million individuals were enrolled in private standalone vision plans regulated by the California Department of Managed Health Care and
are not included in the NAIC data.

5 Insurers may allocate enrollees to state markets using different methods. This could
affect our findings on state-level market share. According to NAIC, these methods may
include allocating each enrollee to the state in which the enrollee resides or where the
insurance plan sponsor, such as an employer, is located, which may be a different state
from where the enrollee resides. For the data we used in our analysis, insurers do not
report their allocation methods to NAIC.

6 Specifically, we considered insurers to have the same parent company if they reported
having the same NAIC holding group identifier or the same NAIC company identifier.

7 We excluded all data from Massachusetts from our dental insurance market analysis due
to a potential reporting error that we identified in one dental insurer’s enrollment data. We
shared our findings on this potential reporting error with NAIC and the Massachusetts
Division of Insurance.

insurance. [8] We also calculated a three-firm concentration ratio for dental

and vision insurers each state, defined as the combined market shares of
enrollment for the three largest insurers in each state.

We analyzed enrollment data from NAIC as they were reported by
insurers to NAIC. We did not independently verify the accuracy or
completeness of the information with the insurers. We assessed the
reliability of the data in several ways, including reviewing related
publications from NAIC and a state insurance agency as well as
performing electronic tests of the data to identify any outliers or
anomalies. We determined that the data as obtained from NAIC were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes of reporting on the concentration of
private dental and vision insurance markets.

In addition, for both objectives, we conducted a literature review for
studies examining these topics. To identify relevant, peer-reviewed
studies, we searched various databases, such as CINAHL with Full Text,
LexisNexis, PubMed, ProQuest Research Library, and Scopus. We
performed these searches to identify articles published from 2015 through
January 2025.

Finally, for both objectives, we obtained stakeholder perspectives. We
interviewed a non-generalizable sample of seven stakeholder groups
representing dental and vision insurers, dental and vision care providers,
and purchasers of dental and vision care plans. We selected these
stakeholders by identifying groups that had large national memberships
and groups that had conducted research or otherwise published on
issues related to dental or vision insurance markets. These included the
American Dental Association, the American Optometric Association, the
National Association of Dental Plans, the National Association of Vision
Care Plans, the Association of Dental Support Organizations, the
Professional Eye Care Associates of America, and the ERISA Industry

8 NAIC data for individual insurance markets also include enrollment in dental and vision
plans available through health insurance exchanges—marketplaces operated by either the
state or federal government that were required to be established in each state by the
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Health insurance exchanges are markets that
operate within each state’s overall individual and small-group market where eligible
individuals and small employers can compare and select among qualified insurance plans
offered by participating insurers. See Pub. L. No. 111-148, § 1321, 124 Stat. 119, 186
(2010).

#### Back round g
###### Market Concentration and Vertical Integration Dental and Vision Benefits

Committee. [9] We also interviewed a dental industry subject matter expert
who published a peer-reviewed 2024 study on market concentration.

We conducted this performance audit from August 2024 through March
2026 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe
that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.

Dental and vision insurance markets may be concentrated or vertically
integrated.

**Market concentration.** This refers to the degree to which a small number
of companies control a large part of a market. [10] Increased market
concentration can occur through consolidation, such as through mergers
and acquisitions, companies exiting the market and leaving fewer
remaining players, or when larger companies gain market share from
smaller companies.

**Vertical integration.** This occurs when a company takes control of
multiple stages of its supply chain, either by merging with or acquiring
companies involved in different stages or by developing those stages
internally. In the dental and vision insurance markets, vertical integration
can be the extent to which companies that provide insurance also own
provider practices or other entities providing dental or vision services and
products, such as administrative services, laboratories, or supplies.

Certain dental and vision benefits may be covered as part of a health
insurance plan while additional dental or vision benefits may be covered
through a stand-alone dental or vision plan purchased separately from
health insurance. For example, health plans may cover treatment for a
dental surgery or vision injury or disease as well as exams and other

9 We considered the ERISA Industry Committee to be a stakeholder from both the dental
and vision industries due to the organization’s broad role representing the interests of
large employer plan sponsors.

10 Control of a market, or market power, is the ability of a firm or group of firms to price
profitably above their marginal cost, indicating a lack of competition.

services. Dental plans typically cover preventive care, including
cleanings, as well as procedures like crowns and root canals. Vision
plans typically cover routine eye exams and glasses or contacts.
Consumers may also forego insurance altogether and pay out of pocket
for dental and vision services, which is referred to as self-pay. [11]

Consumers choosing to purchase dental or vision plans can either
purchase coverage as part of a group plan or consumers can purchase
an individual plan.

**Group plans.** A group dental or vision plan provides private coverage to
a group of individuals, typically employees of a company, or members of
an organization, such as a union. Premium costs may be shared between
plan members and the company or organization sponsoring the plan.
Based on NAIC enrollment data, most consumers purchasing dental or
vision plans do so through group plans. Group plans can either be fully
insured or self-insured. In fully insured group plans, the plan sponsor—
typically an employer—purchases coverage from an insurer. In selfinsured plans, the plan sponsor sets aside funds to pay for employee
health care. Large employers typically offer self-funded plans.

**Individual plans.** Consumers may also purchase dental or vision plans
individually. This includes plans sold through health insurance
exchanges.

According to published data from NAIC, about 75 million adults and
children had dental coverage through fully insured, stand-alone group
plans and about 12 million had dental coverage through stand-alone
individual plans in 2024. [12] During the same time period, about 83 million
adults and children had vision coverage through fully insured, stand-alone
group plans, and about 3 million had vision coverage through stand-alone
individual plans, according to NAIC data. Overall, the number of adults
and children in the United States with either a fully insured, stand-alone

11 In 2022, the American Optometric Association reported that self-pay accounted for 31
percent of optometrists’ revenue. See American Optometric Association, _2022 AOA_
_Survey of Optometric Practice: Income from Optometry_ (St. Louis, Mo.: 2022). In 2024,
out-of-pocket spending accounted for about 20 percent of all dental spending, per the
National Health Expenditures data. See Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services,
_National Health Expenditures by Type of Service and Source of Funds, CY 1960-2024_,
[National Health Expenditure Data, accessed January 28, 2026, https://www.cms.gov/data-](https://www.cms.gov/data-research/statistics-trends-and-reports/national-health-expenditure-data/historical)
[research/statistics-trends-and-reports/national-health-expenditure-data/historical.](https://www.cms.gov/data-research/statistics-trends-and-reports/national-health-expenditure-data/historical)

12 National Association of Insurance Commissioners, _2024 Accident and Health Policy_
_Experience Report_ (Kansas City, Mo.: 2025).

###### Plan Design and Provider Network Structure

#### Concentration of Private Dental and Vision Insurance Markets Varies by State and Vertical Integration Is Limited in Dental Markets

dental or vision plan represented just over a quarter of the U.S.
population of about 340 million in 2024. [13]

Dental and vision insurance plans often differ from health insurance plans
in how they offer benefits and set up their provider networks. Dental and
vision plans typically set annual limits on the amount of coverage they will
provide, called an annual maximum. Vision plans may set annual
maximum levels for specific items, such as glasses frames. After reaching
the annual maximum, a consumer is responsible for 100 percent of
additional expenses for that year. Additionally, while consumers receive
discounts when using an in-network dental or vision provider, they may
have flexibility if they choose to see a provider that is out of network. [14]

In addition to dental and vision insurance, consumers may choose other
products, such as discount plans to reduce dental and vision expenses.
These discount plans provide reduced prices on dental or vision
procedures at specific providers. While these plans are not insurance,
consumers may use them in lieu of an insurance plan. Discount plans
may be offered by insurers alongside insurance plans, or they may be
offered by another organization. For example, dental service
organizations, which specialize in providing centralized administrative
support to independent dental providers, often offer discount plans
covering providers within their networks.

13 Total United States population in 2024 estimated by the United States Census Bureau
as of July 1, 2024.

14 A provider network is a group of providers with which an insurer contracts to provide
services to members at negotiated rates.

###### Private Dental Insurance Markets

**Concentration.** According to our analysis of 2024 data from NAIC, the
concentration of private group and individual stand-alone dental
insurance markets varied among states. Across all states, the combined
market share of the three largest dental insurers in each state ranged
from about 38 to about 98 percent of enrollment for the group market and
about 38 to about 98 percent for the individual market. Market share of
the single largest dental insurer in each state ranged from about 14 to
about 95 percent for the group market and about 14 to about 95 percent
for the individual market. See table 1.

**Table 1: 2024 Market Share for the Three Largest and Single Largest Stand-Alone Dental Insurers and the Median Number of**
**Stand-Alone Dental Insurers**

**Median market share**

**of single largest**
**insurer (percentage)**

**Range of market**

**share of single**

**largest insurer**

**(percentage)**

**Range of market share of**

**three largest insurers**

**(percentage)**

**Median market**

**share of three**
**largest insurers**

**(percentage)**

**Median number of**

**insurers per state**

Group
market

Individual

market

37.9 – 97.5 66.8 13.6 – 95.1 38.0 39

37.5 – 97.5 69.5 14.4 – 95.1 34.5 22

Source: GAO analysis of data from the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC). | GAO-26-107787

Note: Consumers can either purchase dental or vision coverage as part of a group plan, such as one
offered through an employer, or individually, such as through a health insurance exchange. These
exchanges, required to be established in each state by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
and operated by either the state or federal government, are marketplaces where eligible individuals
and small employers can choose insurance plans offered by participating insurers. We calculated
market share for each state based on the total number of individuals insured as of December 31,
2024, as reported by insurers to NAIC. Because there can be multiple insurers within a market that
share a single parent company, we aggregated such insurers to the parent-company level following
the aggregation scheme set forth by NAIC. We excluded all data from Massachusetts from our dental
insurance market analysis due to a potential reporting error that we identified in one dental insurer’s
enrollment data. We also excluded insurers that reported zero in enrollment in a state market. NAIC
data do not include about five million enrollees in private, stand-alone dental plans in California from
insurers that are regulated by the California Department of Managed Health Care.

For the dental group market, 11 states each had a combined market
share of the three largest insurers of 80 percent or above. Delaware and
Hawaii each had the highest combined market share at 97 percent.
Twenty-two states each had a combined market share of 60 percent or
above but below 80 percent. Louisiana had the lowest combined market
share at 38 percent. See figure 1.

**Figure 1: Combined Market Share by State for the Three Largest Stand-Alone Dental Insurers in the Group Insurance Market**
**(2024)**

Note: Consumers can either purchase dental or vision coverage as part of a group plan, such as one
offered through an employer, or individually, such as through a health insurance exchange. These
exchanges, required to be established in each state by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
and operated by either the state or federal government, are marketplaces where eligible individuals
and small employers can choose insurance plans offered by participating insurers. We calculated
market share for each state based on the total number of individuals insured as of December 31,
2024, as reported by insurers to NAIC. Because there can be multiple insurers within a market that
share a single parent company, we aggregated such insurers to the parent-company level following
the aggregation scheme set forth by NAIC.

a NAIC data do not include about five million enrollees in private, stand-alone dental plans in California
from insurers that are regulated by the California Department of Managed Health Care.

b We excluded all data from Massachusetts from our dental insurance market analysis due to a
potential reporting error that we identified in one dental insurer’s enrollment data.

For the dental individual market, 14 states each had a combined market
share of the three largest insurers of 80 percent or above. Rhode Island
and Delaware each had the highest combined market share at about 97
percent. Twenty-one states each had a combined market share of 60
percent or above but below 80 percent. South Carolina had the lowest
combined market share at 37 percent. See figure 2.

**Figure 2: Combined Market Share by State for the Three Largest Stand-Alone Dental Insurers in the Individual Insurance**
**Market (2024)**

Note: Consumers can either purchase dental or vision coverage as part of a group plan, such as one
offered through an employer, or individually, such as through a health insurance exchange. These
exchanges, required to be established in each state by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
and operated by either the state or federal government, are marketplaces where eligible individuals
and small employers can choose insurance plans offered by participating insurers. We calculated
market share for each state based on the total number of individuals insured as of December 31,

2024, as reported by insurers to NAIC. Because there can be multiple insurers within a market that
share a single parent company, we aggregated such insurers to the parent-company level following
the aggregation scheme set forth by NAIC.

a NAIC data do not include about five million enrollees in private, stand-alone dental plans in California
from insurers that are regulated by the California Department of Managed Health Care.

b We excluded all data from Massachusetts from our dental insurance market analysis due to a
potential reporting error that we identified in one dental insurer’s enrollment data.

Appendix I provides information on market share for the single largest
stand-alone dental insurer in each state as well as the total number of

dental insurers in each state in 2024.

Our review of the literature over the last decade identified two peerreviewed studies that examined concentration of dental insurance

markets. These studies found that concentration of dental insurance

markets varied across states, as follows.

One study using data from 2013 through 2015 found significant
variation in dental insurance market concentration across states. This
study also found that, when dental insurance markets were defined by
zip code, about 22 percent of dentists worked in markets that the
study identified as highly concentrated, and most dentists (about 75
percent) worked in moderately concentrated dental insurance
markets. [15]

A second study examining dental plans available through health
insurance exchanges from 2016 through 2023 found that the number
of insurers offering adult stand-alone dental plans varied widely
across states, with two states (South Dakota and Vermont) having
only one insurer offering plans; in contrast, one state (Texas) had 13
insurers offering plans. [16] At the county level, the study found that 43
percent of counties had six to 10 insurers offering adult stand-alone
dental plans, and 7 percent of counties had only one insurer.

15 Kamyar Nasseh, John R. Bowblis, Marko Vujicic, and Sean Shenghsiu Huang,
“Consolidation in the Dental Industry: a Closer Look at Dental Payers and Providers,”
_International Journal of Health Economics and Management_, vol. 20 (2020). The authors
defined highly concentrated markets as those with a Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI)
greater than 2500 and moderately concentrated markets as those with an HHI from 1500
to 2500. HHI is calculated by squaring the market share of each firm competing in the
market and then summing the resulting numbers.

16 Hawazin W. Elani, Md Shahinoor Rahman, Jacob Wallace, Meredith B. Rosenthal, and
Benjamin D. Sommers, “Availability of Adult Dental Plans In the Affordable Care Act
Marketplaces, 2016-23,” _Health Affairs_, vol. 43, no. 11 (2024).

Stakeholders from the dental industry and a subject matter expert we
interviewed commented on dental insurance market concentration at the
state or national levels. These perspectives aligned with some of our
findings on concentration. At the state level, one of the four industry
stakeholders commented that the concentration of dental markets varied

across states. However, the stakeholder added that data and research on
dental insurer concentration by state were limited.

Another dental industry stakeholder commented that most states had
more than 20 dental insurers and that the number of insurers in states
had not changed over time. [17] However, this stakeholder also said that, in
some states, a particular insurer may be dominant due to historical
reasons such as a longstanding association between an insurer and
employers or providers in a market.

At the national level, those we interviewed had varying perspectives on
changes in market concentration over time. One of the four dental
industry stakeholders we interviewed told us their association members
reported that the dental insurance market had become increasingly
concentrated over the last 10 years, although the dental insurance market
overall was not as concentrated as the broader health insurance market.
This stakeholder also said that there had been very little change over time
in the set of top companies that make up largest dental insurers. In
contrast, two industry stakeholders as well as the subject matter expert
we interviewed described concentration in the dental insurance market as
relatively stable. For example, the subject matter expert said that the
concentration of the dental insurance market has generally been stable
with some minor changes, such as insurers leaving the market. One
stakeholder said that there have not been major mergers in the dental
insurance market as had occurred in the health insurance market, but
there have been some acquisitions of smaller dental insurers by larger

ones.

**Vertical integration.** We did not find aggregate data on the extent of
vertical integration in the dental insurance market. Further, we did not find
any peer-reviewed studies that examined vertical integration of the dental
insurance market. Stakeholders from the dental industry and the subject
matter expert we interviewed told us that vertical integration in the dental
insurance market is limited. One of the four dental industry stakeholders

17 Our analysis of NAIC data found that the median number of stand-alone dental insurers
per state in 2024 was 39 for insurers offering group plans and 22 for insurers offering
individual plans.

###### Private Vision Insurance Markets

we interviewed said that the largest insurers in dental markets are
generally not acquiring providers or otherwise vertically integrating.
Another of the four stakeholders said any vertical integration in the dental
industry is only a recent development. The subject matter expert we
interviewed commented that there are a few examples of vertical
integration in the dental insurance industry, but that it was not common.
One example we identified through company website information and
media reports was that an insurer with a large presence in one state
announced in July 2025 that it had acquired a dental practice with about
30 offices.

**Concentration.** According to our analysis of 2024 data from NAIC, the
concentration of private group and individual stand-alone vision insurance
markets varied among states. Across all states, the combined market
share of the three largest vision insurers in each state ranged from about
41 to about 96 percent of enrollment for the group market and about 56 to
about 99 percent for the individual market. Market share of the single
largest vision insurer in each state ranged from about 16 to about 82
percent for the group market and 22 to about 73 percent for the individual
market. See table 2.

**Table 2: 2024 Market Share for the Three Largest and Single Largest Stand-Alone Vision Insurers and the Median Number of**
**Stand-Alone Vision Insurers**

**Median market share**

**Range of market share**

**of three largest**
**insurers (percentage)**

**of three largest**

**insurers**
**(percentage)**

**Range of market share of**
**single largest insurer**
**(percentage)**

**Median market share**

**of single largest**
**insurer (percentage)**

**Median number**

**of insurers per**

**state**

Group
market

Individual

market

41.2 – 95.5 77.4 15.8 – 81.9 40.9 28

55.6 – 98.8 78.2 22.0 – 73.3 36.8 11

Source: GAO analysis of data from the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC). | GAO-26-107787

Note: Consumers can either purchase dental or vision coverage as part of a group plan, such as one
offered through an employer, or individually, such as through a health insurance exchange. These
exchanges, required to be established in each state by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
and operated by either the state or federal government, are marketplaces where eligible individuals
and small employers can choose insurance plans offered by participating insurers. We calculated
market share for each state based on the total number of individuals insured as of December 31,
2024, as reported by insurers to NAIC. Because there can be multiple insurers within a market that
share a single parent company, we aggregated such insurers to the parent-company level following
the aggregation scheme set forth by NAIC. We excluded insurers that reported zero in enrollment in a
state market. NAIC data do not include about eight million enrollees in private, stand-alone vision
plans in California from insurers that are regulated by the California Department of Managed Health
Care.

For the vision group market, 19 states each had a combined market
share of the three largest insurers of 80 percent or above. The District of
Columbia had the highest combined market share at 95 percent. Twentyeight states each had a combined market share of 60 percent or above
but below 80 percent. Louisiana had the lowest combined market share at
41 percent. See figure 3.

**Figure 3: Combined Market Share by State for the Three Largest Stand-Alone Vision Insurers in the Group Insurance Market**
**(2024)**

Note: Consumers can either purchase dental or vision coverage as part of a group plan, such as one
offered through an employer, or individually, such as through a health insurance exchange. These
exchanges, required to be established in each state by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
and operated by either the state or federal government, are marketplaces where eligible individuals
and small employers can choose insurance plans offered by participating insurers. We calculated
market share for each state based on the total number of individuals insured as of December 31,

2024, as reported by insurers to NAIC. Because there can be multiple insurers within a market that
share a single parent company, we aggregated such insurers to the parent-company level following
the aggregation scheme set forth by NAIC.

a NAIC data do not include about eight million enrollees in private, stand-alone vision plans in
California from insurers that are regulated by the California Department of Managed Health Care.

For the vision individual market, 21 states each had a combined market
share of the three largest insurers of 80 percent or above. Hawaii had the
highest combined market share at 99 percent. Twenty-five states each
had a combined market share of above 60 percent or above but below 80
percent. Four states each had the lowest combined market share at 56
percent—Illinois, Indiana, Tennessee, and Wisconsin. See figure 4.

**Figure 4: Combined Market Share by State for the Three Largest Stand-Alone Vision Insurers in the Individual Insurance**
**Market (2024)**

Note: Consumers can either purchase dental or vision coverage as part of a group plan, such as one
offered through an employer, or individually, such as through a health insurance exchange. These
exchanges, required to be established in each state by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
and operated by either the state or federal government, are marketplaces where eligible individuals
and small employers can choose insurance plans offered by participating insurers. We calculated
market share for each state based on the total number of individuals insured as of December 31,
2024, as reported by insurers to NAIC. Because there can be multiple insurers within a market that
share a single parent company, we aggregated such insurers to the parent-company level following
the aggregation scheme set forth by NAIC.

a NAIC data do not include about eight million enrollees in private, stand-alone vision plans in
California from insurers that are regulated by the California Department of Managed Health Care.

Appendix II provides information on market share for the single largest
stand-alone vision insurer in each state as well as the total number of

vision insurers in each state in 2024.

We did not find any peer-reviewed studies of concentration of vision
insurance markets published in the last decade. One vision industry
stakeholder we interviewed told us that, based on an internal study they
conducted and a broader definition of the vision insurance market, no
vision insurer held a market share at the national level greater than about
30 percent in 2023. This was also the case when the analysis was done
within the nine United States census regions, according to the
stakeholder. [18]

**Vertical integration.** We did not find aggregate data on the extent of
vertical integration in the vision insurance market. Further, we did not find
any peer-reviewed studies that examined vertical integration of the vision
insurance market. Two of four vision industry stakeholders we interviewed
shared observations on vertical integration in the vision insurance market.
One stakeholder said two major players in the vision industry own and
operate vision insurance plans, as well as provider offices, lens and frame
manufacturers, and eyewear retail brands. This stakeholder said these
companies acquire active providers across the country and have a
presence in most state vision insurance markets. We subsequently
analyzed 2024 NAIC data to obtain more information on these two
companies. According to our analysis, one of these two companies had
fully insured, stand-alone vision plan enrollees in 47 states. The
company’s median market share across these states was 33.6 percent for

18 This stakeholder’s study findings differed from ours in part because the study was based
on a broader definition of the vision insurance market. Specifically, the study was based,
in part, on an analysis of vision care claims data from 20 vision insurers and included both
self-insured and fully insured plans, as well as claims from Medicare Advantage plans. In
addition, the study included vision care transactions from self-pay consumers who did not
use vision insurance.

#### Limited Information Is Available to Assess the Effects of Concentration and Vertical Integration on Competition in Private Dental and Vision Insurance Markets

the group market and 22.2 percent for the individual market. In addition to
providing vision insurance, this company also owns vision care providers,
retail locations, eyewear retail brands, and an electronic health records
company, among other ventures.

The other stakeholder said that vertical integration within the vision
industry has existed for at least the last 20 years. This stakeholder said
that the vision industry has seen companies expand into operations at
multiple stages of the vision industry’s supply chain. This stakeholder said
that, despite vertical integration within the industry, most vision providers
are not under common ownership with insurers.

**Effects of concentration** . Limited information is available to assess any
effects of concentration on competition in private dental and vision
insurance markets. We did not find any studies over the last decade of
the effects of concentration in vision insurance markets and found only
two peer-reviewed studies that discussed the effects of concentration of
dental insurance markets. These studies found that increased insurer
concentration can affect reimbursements for dental services paid by
insurers to providers as well as dental practice size and ownership, as
follows.

One study we identified using data from 2015 through 2017 found
that, as insurer concentration increased at the county level,
reimbursements for dental services paid by insurers to providers
generally declined. The study also found that, when dental insurance
markets went from moderately concentrated to highly concentrated,
the average reimbursement across all dental procedures declined. [19]
The authors noted that dental provider markets were substantially less
concentrated than insurance markets, and this may have limited the
ability of dentists to negotiate for higher reimbursements.

The second study, which reviewed data from 2013 through 2015,
found that more concentrated dental insurance markets were
modestly associated with larger dental practices and lower rates of
dentist ownership of practices. [20] The authors noted that the effect of
changing dental practice structures on patients, including types and

19 Kamyar Nasseh, John R. Bowblis, and Marko Vujicic, “Pricing in Commercial Dental
Insurance and Provider Markets,” _Health Services Research_, vol. 56 (2021). The authors
defined moderately concentrated markets as those with an HHI between 1500 and 2500
and highly concentrated markets as those with an HHI greater than 2500.

20 Nasseh, Bowblis, Vujicic, and Huang, “Consolidation in the Dental Industry.”

prices of services provided, is largely unknown and merits further
study.

Some of the dental and vision industry stakeholders as well as the subject
matter expert we interviewed shared limited observations about the
effects of concentration based on their experiences, including effects on
providers’ ability to negotiate contracts and reimbursement with insurers.
However, these observations are not generalizable to all dental and vision
insurance markets. The subject matter expert we interviewed, as well as
two of four stakeholders from the dental industry, commented that an
insurer’s dominance within a market can limit a provider’s ability to
negotiate for better contract terms with that insurer. Specifically, the
subject matter expert said that, due to this, high insurer concentration can
mean lower reimbursement for providers. This expert also said that when
providers are unable to negotiate beneficial reimbursement rates with
insurers, those providers may raise prices for patients paying out of
pocket, including for the uninsured. Another dental industry stakeholder
said it was understandable that providers would like to see higher
reimbursement; but that some consumers—specifically, small
employers—purchasing dental insurance can be very price-sensitive, and
increased costs for dental insurance can greatly affect demand.
Therefore, insurers have to contain costs, which can mean that
reimbursement does not increase as quickly as providers would like.

One of four vision industry stakeholders we interviewed provided
observations on the effects of concentration. Specifically, this stakeholder
noted that providers in one market faced loss of their contracts with a
dominant insurer if the providers did not accept new terms implementing
significant cuts to reimbursements. These contracts supported the
providers’ entire patient base, the stakeholder said.

**Effects of vertical integration.** Limited information is available to assess
any effects of vertical integration on competition in private dental and
vision insurance markets. Our review of the literature over the last decade
did not find any peer-reviewed studies on vertical integration in either the
dental or vision insurance markets. In addition, two of four dental industry
stakeholders as well as the subject matter expert we interviewed
commented on a lack of opportunity to evaluate the effects of vertical
integration due to limited instances of vertical integration among dental
insurers. Specifically, they said that, because vertical integration within
the dental insurance industry is a recent development and not a common
occurrence, it was difficult to identify effects from vertical integration.

#### Third-Party Views

Two of four vision industry stakeholders we interviewed provided limited
comments related to the effects of vertical integration in the vision
insurance industry based on their experiences. One stakeholder said,
based on an internal study they had conducted, that vertical integration
within any industry may be beneficial for consumers under the right
market conditions. [21] The other stakeholder said that vertically integrated
vision insurers use contracts with providers to encourage use of insurerowned labs. The stakeholder also said that providers acquired by insurers
feel pressure to focus on selling frames and lenses rather than providing
comprehensive care.

For our report findings based on NAIC data, we provided a draft of these
findings to NAIC for review. NAIC had no comments.

We are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional
committees and other interested parties. In addition, the report is
available at no charge on the GAO website at https://www.gao.gov.

If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact
[me at DickenJ@gao.gov. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional](mailto:dickenj@gao.gov)
Relations and Media Relations may be found on the last page of this
report. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in
appendix III.

John E. Dicken

Director, Health Care

21 Our prior work has noted that consolidation within the health care industry, including
from vertical integration, has the potential to improve efficiency, but it also has the
potential to impede competition and contribute to increased costs to patients, employers,
insurers, and federal health care programs. See GAO, _Health Care Consolidation:_
_Published Estimates of the Extent and Effects of Physician Consolidation_,
[GAO-25-107450 (Washington, D.C.: Sept. 22, 2025).](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-25-107450)

**Appendix I: Market Share for the Single**
## Appendix I: Market Share for the Single Largest Stand-Alone Insurer and Number of

**Insurers by State in the Group and Individual**
**Dental Insurance Markets (2024)**
## Largest Stand-Alone Insurer and Number of Insurers by State in the Group and Individual Dental Insurance Markets (2024)

**Table 3: Market Share for the Single Largest Stand-Alone Insurer and Number of Insurers by State in the Group Dental**
**Insurance Market (2024)**

**Number of insurers in**

**State** **Insurer** **Market share (percentage)**

**state**

Alabama BCBS of AL GRP 50.2 39

Alaska PREMERA BLUE CROSS GRP 42.5 30

Arizona Delta Dental Plan of AZ Corp 23.7 44

Arkansas Renaissance Hlth Srv Corp Grp 56.5 38

California METROPOLITAN GRP 19.1 41

Colorado HIGHMARK GRP 59.8 37

Connecticut CIGNA HLTH GRP 36.1 33

Delaware Dentegra Grp 95.1 31

District of Columbia HIGHMARK GRP 66.8 32

Florida GUARDIAN LIFE GRP 16.3 41

Georgia CIGNA HLTH GRP 21.1 41

Hawaii Life & Specialty Ventures LLC Grp 70.8 24

Idaho Delta Dental Plan of ID 38.4 44

Illinois HCSC GRP 19.6 42

Indiana Renaissance Hlth Srv Corp Grp 40.4 45

Iowa Delta Dental of IA Grp 74.6 37

Kansas Delta Dental of KS Grp 44.1 42

Kentucky Renaissance Hlth Srv Corp Grp 52.1 41

Louisiana LOUISIANA HLTH SERV GRP 13.7 38

Maine Northeast Delta Dental Grp 60.0 28

Maryland METROPOLITAN GRP 28.9 35

Michigan Renaissance Hlth Srv Corp Grp 59.3 47

Minnesota Stratacor Grp 29.1 36

Mississippi GUARDIAN LIFE GRP 18.7 41

Missouri METROPOLITAN GRP 15.7 46

Montana HCSC GRP 26.6 32

Nebraska BCBS of NE Grp 28.3 40

Nevada Liberty Dental Plan Grp 49.4 42

New Hampshire Northeast Delta Dental Grp 53.3 25

New Jersey Delta Dental Plan of NJ Grp 26.1 41

New Mexico Renaissance Hlth Srv Corp Grp 47.8 32

New York Dentegra Grp 13.6 35

North Carolina Renaissance Hlth Srv Corp Grp 17.5 42

**Appendix I: Market Share for the Single**
**Largest Stand-Alone Insurer and Number of**
**Insurers by State in the Group and Individual**
**Dental Insurance Markets (2024)**

North Dakota BCBS of ND 30.1 30

Ohio Renaissance Hlth Srv Corp Grp 38.1 47

Oklahoma Delta Dental of OK 35.0 41

Oregon Oregon Dental Serv Grp 21.8 39

Pennsylvania Dentegra Grp 23.6 44

Rhode Island Delta Dental of RI Grp 47.5 21

South Carolina BCBS of SC Grp 53.9 43

South Dakota Delta Dental of SD Grp 58.9 35

Tennessee Renaissance Hlth Srv Corp Grp 38.0 41

Texas CIGNA HLTH GRP 16.1 47

Utah EDUCATORS MUT GRP 14.2 40

Vermont Northeast Delta Dental Grp 80.1 22

Virginia Corvesta Grp 30.6 41

Washington Delta Dental of WA 51.0 37

West Virginia Sun Life Financial Grp 35.6 34

Wisconsin Delta Dental of WI Grp 64.5 37

Wyoming Delta Dental Plan of WY 47.2 30

Source: GAO analysis of data from the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC). | GAO-26-107787

Note: Consumers can either purchase dental or vision coverage as part of a group plan, such as one
offered through an employer, or individually, such as through a health insurance exchange. These
exchanges, required to be established in each state by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
and operated by either the state or federal government, are marketplaces where eligible individuals
and small employers can choose insurance plans offered by participating insurers. We calculated
market share for each state based on the total number of individuals insured as of December 31,
2024, as reported by insurers to NAIC. Because there can be multiple insurers within a market that
share a single parent company, we aggregated such insurers to the parent-company level following
the aggregation scheme set forth by NAIC. We excluded all data from Massachusetts from our dental
insurance market analysis due to a potential reporting error that we identified in one dental insurer’s
enrollment data. We also excluded insurers that reported zero in enrollment in a state market. NAIC
data do not include about five million enrollees in private, stand-alone dental plans in California from
insurers that are regulated by the California Department of Managed Health Care. We present each
insurer’s name exactly as it appeared in the NAIC data.

**Table 4: Market Share for the Single Largest Stand-Alone Insurer and Number of Insurers by State in the Individual Dental**
**Insurance Market (2024)**

**State** **Insurer** **Market share (percentage)** **Number of insurers in state**

Alabama BCBS of AL Grp 60.0 26

Alaska Oregon Dental Serv Grp 34.4 12

Arizona Delta Dental Plan of AZ Grp 30.4 27

Arkansas Life & Specialty Ventures LLC Grp 30.3 26

California Elevance Hlth Inc Grp 15.7 20

Colorado Ensemble Innovation Ventures Grp 34.6 22

Connecticut Elevance Htlh Inc Grp 29.0 18

**Appendix I: Market Share for the Single**
**Largest Stand-Alone Insurer and Number of**
**Insurers by State in the Group and Individual**
**Dental Insurance Markets (2024)**

Delaware Dentegra Grp 95.1 17

District of Columbia CAREFIRST INC GRP 19.7 16

Florida Guidewell Mut Holding Grp 21.9 27

Georgia UNITEDHEALTH GRP 22.9 26

Hawaii Life & Specialty Ventures LLC Grp 84.2 14

Idaho Delta Dental Plan of ID Inc 43.1 24

Illinois Delta Dental Plan of IL Grp 31.7 30

Indiana Renaissance Hlth Srv Corp Grp 25.9 28

Iowa Delta Dental of IA Grp 54.6 22

Kansas BCBS of KS GRP 32.0 28

Kentucky Renaissance Hlth Srv Corp Grp 52.4 22

Louisiana Sun Life Financial Inc Grp 88.7 24

Maine Northeast Delta Dental Grp 67.6 14

Maryland Dentegra Grp 31.0 24

Michigan Renaissance Health Srv Corp Grp 39.4 29

Minnesota Stratacor Grp 72.9 16

Mississippi UNITEDHEALTH GRP 19.6 23

Missouri UNITEDHEALTH GRP 21.7 31

Montana HCSC GRP 41.3 18

Nebraska Americans Mut Holding GRP 20.1 24

Nevada UNITEDHEALTH GRP 23.7 21

New Hampshire Sun Life Financial Inc Grp 62.1 18

New Jersey Delta Dental Plan of NJ Grp 59.6 18

New Mexico Renaissance Hlth Srv Corp Grp 43.4 21

New York Dentegra Grp 22.5 19

North Carolina BCBS of NC Grp 23.8 24

North Dakota Stratacor Grp 36.0 16

Ohio Renaissance Hlth Srv Corp Grp 27.4 28

Oklahoma Delta Dental of OK 27.7 28

Oregon Life & Specialty Ventures LLC Grp 47.4 21

Pennsylvania Dentegra Grp 32.5 29

Rhode Island BCBS of RI 74.1 14

South Carolina Americans Mut Holding Grp 14.5 24

South Dakota AFLAC Grp 28.7 15

Tennessee Sun Life Financial Inc Grp 72.8 23

Texas Sun Life Financial Inc Grp 72.8 30

Utah EDUCATORS MUT GRP 16.6 25

Vermont Northeast Delta Dental Grp 83.3 11

**Appendix I: Market Share for the Single**
**Largest Stand-Alone Insurer and Number of**
**Insurers by State in the Group and Individual**
**Dental Insurance Markets (2024)**

Virginia Corvesta Grp 51.5 22

Washington Delta Dental of WA 65.4 19

West Virginia Dentegra Grp 32.0 17

Wisconsin Delta Dental of WI Grp 60.9 28

Wyoming Delta Dental Plan of WY 43.3 20

Source: GAO analysis of data from the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC). | GAO-26-107787

Note: Consumers can either purchase dental or vision coverage as part of a group plan, such as one
offered through an employer, or individually, such as through a health insurance exchange. These
exchanges, required to be established in each state by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
and operated by either the state or federal government, are marketplaces where eligible individuals
and small employers can choose insurance plans offered by participating insurers. We calculated
market share for each state based on the total number of individuals insured as of December 31,
2024, as reported by insurers to NAIC. Because there can be multiple insurers within a market that
share a single parent company, we aggregated such insurers to the parent-company level following
the aggregation scheme set forth by NAIC. We excluded all data from Massachusetts from our dental
insurance market analysis due to a potential reporting error that we identified in one dental insurer’s
enrollment data. We also excluded insurers that reported zero in enrollment in a state market. NAIC
data do not include about five million enrollees in private, stand-alone dental plans in California from
insurers that are regulated by the California Department of Managed Health Care. We present each
insurer’s name exactly as it appeared in the NAIC data.

**Appendix II: Market Share for the Single**
## Appendix II: Market Share for the Single Largest Stand-Alone Insurer and Number of

**Insurers by State in the Group and Individual**
**Vision Insurance Markets (2024)**
## Largest Stand-Alone Insurer and Number of Insurers by State in the Group and Individual Vision Insurance Markets (2024)

**Table 5: Market Share for the Single Largest Stand-Alone Insurer and Number of Insurers by State in the Group Vision**
**Insurance Market (2024)**

**State** **Insurer** **Market share (percentage)** **Number of insurers in**

**state**

Alabama VISION SERV PLAN GRP 51.1 27

Alaska VISION SERV PLAN GRP 51.0 20

Arizona VISION SERV PLAN GRP 28.1 33

Arkansas Renaissance Hlth Serv Corp Grp 44.7 23

California FIDELITY SECURITY GRP 25.2 30

Colorado VISION SERV PLAN GRP 59.9 28

Connecticut FIDELITY SECURITY GRP 32.6 25

Delaware FIDELITY SECURITY GRP 45.1 24

District of Columbia UNITEDHEALTH GRP 44.7 24

Florida VISION SERV PLAN GRP 29.5 30

Georgia FIDELITY SECURITY GRP 44.6 32

Hawaii METROPOLITAN GRP 55.5 12

Idaho VISION SERV PLAN GRP 76.9 30

Illinois VISION SERV PLAN GRP 46.5 32

Indiana VISION SERV PLAN GRP 31.6 30

Iowa FIDELITY SECURITY GRP 37.6 26

Kansas VISION SERV PLAN GRP 34.7 29

Kentucky Elevance Hlth Grp 41.4 29

Louisiana VISION SERV PLAN GRP 15.8 30

Maine Elevance Hlth Grp 28.4 22

Maryland FIDELITY SECURITY GRP 41.7 25

Massachusetts FIDELITY SECURITY GRP 41.7 24

Michigan BCBS of MI Grp 32.6 30

Minnesota FIDELITY SECURITY GRP 34.8 28

Mississippi VISION SERV PLAN GRP 32.4 27

Missouri FIDELITY SECURITY GRP 54.8 31

Montana VISION SERV PLAN GRP 51.1 26

Nebraska FIDELITY SECURITY GRP 34.6 27

Nevada FIDELITY SECURITY GRP 34.7 29

New Hampshire VISION SERV PLAN GRP 38.5 20

New Jersey VISION SERV PLAN GRP 41.7 27

New Mexico VISION SERV PLAN GRP 59.6 25

New York VISION SERV PLAN GRP 29.0 29

**Appendix II: Market Share for the Single**
**Largest Stand-Alone Insurer and Number of**
**Insurers by State in the Group and Individual**
**Vision Insurance Markets (2024)**

North Carolina VISION SERV PLAN GRP 39.2 27

North Dakota VISION SERV PLAN GRP 26.5 20

Ohio VISION SERV PLAN GRP 37.2 34

Oklahoma VISION SERV PLAN GRP 72.1 28

Oregon VISION SERV PLAN GRP 56.7 29

Pennsylvania VISION SERV PLAN GRP 38.4 28

Rhode Island VISION SERV PLAN GRP 57.7 15

South Carolina BCBS of SC Grp 50.6 30

South Dakota VISION SERV PLAN GRP 60.0 22

Tennessee FIDELITY SECURITY GRP 33.0 29

Texas VISION SERV PLAN GRP 40.9 34

Utah FIDELITY SECURITY GRP 30.2 32

Vermont VISION SERV PLAN GRP 81.9 22

Virginia VISION SERV PLAN GRP 59.5 29

Washington VISION SERV PLAN GRP 58.3 29

West Virginia HUMANA GRP 40.0 25

Wisconsin Delta Dental of WI Grp 33.9 27

Wyoming PRINCIPAL FIN GRP 21.6 21

Source: GAO analysis of data from the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC). | GAO-26-107787

Note: Consumers can either purchase dental or vision coverage as part of a group plan, such as one
offered through an employer, or individually, such as through a health insurance exchange. These
exchanges, required to be established in each state by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
and operated by either the state or federal government, are marketplaces where eligible individuals
and small employers can choose insurance plans offered by participating insurers. We calculated
market share for each state based on the total number of individuals insured as of December 31,
2024, as reported by insurers to NAIC. Because there can be multiple insurers within a market that
share a single parent company, we aggregated such insurers to the parent-company level following
the aggregation scheme set forth by NAIC. We also excluded insurers that reported zero in
enrollment in a state market. NAIC data do not include about eight million enrollees in private, standalone vision plans in California from insurers that are regulated by the California Department of
Managed Health Care. We present each insurer’s name exactly as it appeared in the NAIC data.

**Table 6: Market Share for the Single Largest Stand-Alone Insurer and Number of Insurers by State in the Individual Vision**
**Insurance Market (2024)**

**Number of insurers in**

**State** **Insurer** **Market share (percentage)**

**state**

Alabama VISION SERV PLAN GRP 29.2 11

Alaska VISION SERV PLAN GRP 52.3 7

Arizona UNITEDHEALTH GRP 29.8 13

Arkansas Arkansas BCBS Grp 52.3 12

California Blue Shield of CA Grp 48.5 11

Colorado Ensemble Innovation Ventures Grp 34.4 11

**Appendix II: Market Share for the Single**
**Largest Stand-Alone Insurer and Number of**
**Insurers by State in the Group and Individual**
**Vision Insurance Markets (2024)**

Connecticut Elevance Hlth Inc Grp 31.1 12

Delaware VISION SERV PLAN GRP 33.6 9

District of Columbia VISION SERV PLAN GRP 41.2 9

Florida VISION SERV PLAN GRP 32.1 14

Georgia UNITEDHEALTH GRP 42.7 14

Hawaii Ameritas Mut Holding GRP 51.1 6

Idaho VISION SERV PLAN GRP 46.8 10

Illinois UNITEDHEALTH GRP 22.7 16

Indiana UNITEDHEALTH GRP 24.1 14

Iowa FIDELITY SECURITY GRP 48.9 11

Kansas UNITEDHEALTH GRP 27.6 12

Kentucky Single Vision Solution Inc 30.3 11

Louisiana UNITEDHEALTH GRP 36.3 11

Maine UNITEDHEALTH GRP 31.4 10

Maryland UNITEDHEALTH GRP 46.5 9

Massachusetts VISION SERV PLAN GRP 58.0 8

Michigan BCBS of MI Grp 41.8 15

Minnesota Ameritas Mut Holding GRP 32.7 12

Mississippi UNITEDHEALTH GRP 36.8 11

Missouri UNITEDHEALTH GRP 27.7 14

Montana VISION SERV PLAN GRP 69.7 8

Nebraska Ameritas Mut Holding GRP 46.4 11

Nevada UNITEDHEALTH GRP 30.1 12

New Hampshire UNITEDHEALTH GRP 32.8 10

New Jersey VISION SERV PLAN GRP 40.3 12

New Mexico VISION SERV PLAN GRP 58.3 8

New York VISION SERV PLAN GRP 58.1 10

North Carolina BCBS of NC Grp 66.5 12

North Dakota Ameritas Mut Holding GRP 49.4 9

Ohio UNITEDHEALTH GRP 25.1 14

Oklahoma VISION SERV PLAN GRP 29.2 13

Oregon VISION SERV PLAN GRP 52.7 11

Pennsylvania UPMC HLTH SYSTEM GRP 73.3 13

Rhode Island VISION SERV PLAN GRP 67.9 7

South Carolina Ameritas Mut Holding GRP 33.7 12

South Dakota VISION SERV PLAN GRP 34.8 9

Tennessee UNITEDHEALTH GRP 27.9 13

Texas UNITEDHEALTH GRP 33.5 14

**Appendix II: Market Share for the Single**
**Largest Stand-Alone Insurer and Number of**
**Insurers by State in the Group and Individual**
**Vision Insurance Markets (2024)**

Utah UNITEDHEALTH GRP 42.3 12

Vermont VISION SERV PLAN GRP 64.9 7

Virginia Elevance Hlth Inc Grp 22.0 10

Washington VISION SERV PLAN GRP 49.5 9

West Virginia VISION SERV PLAN GRP 27.0 12

Wisconsin UNITEDHEALTH GRP 22.2 15

Wyoming UNITEDHEALTH GRP 42.1 9

Source: GAO analysis of data from the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC). | GAO-26-107787

Note: Consumers can either purchase dental or vision coverage as part of a group plan, such as one
offered through an employer, or individually, such as through a health insurance exchange. These
exchanges, required to be established in each state by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
and operated by either the state or federal government, are marketplaces where eligible individuals
and small employers can choose insurance plans offered by participating insurers. We calculated
market share for each state based on the total number of individuals insured as of December 31,
2024, as reported by insurers to NAIC. Because there can be multiple insurers within a market that
share a single parent company, we aggregated such insurers to the parent-company level following
the aggregation scheme set forth by NAIC. We also excluded insurers that reported zero in
enrollment in a state market. NAIC data do not include about eight million enrollees in private, standalone vision plans in California from insurers that are regulated by the California Department of
Managed Health Care. We present each insurer’s name exactly as it appeared in the NAIC data.

**Appendix III: GAO Contact and Staff**
## Appendix III: GAO Contact and Staff Acknowledgments Acknowledgments

#### GAO Contact Staff Acknowledgments

[John E. Dicken, Director, Health Care, DickenJ@gao.gov](mailto:dickenj@gao.gov)

In addition to the contact listed above, Kristi Peterson (Assistant Director),
Ramsey Asaly (Analyst-in-Charge), Julianne Flowers, Joy Grossman,
Laurie Pachter, and Timothy Planert made key contributions to this report.
Also contributing were Leia Dickerson, Emei Li, Kathleen McQueeney,
Monica Perez-Nelson, Ethiene Salgado-Rodriguez, Ravi Sharma, and
Kelly Troutman.

##### GAO’s Mission Obtaining Copies of GAO Reports and Testimony

###### Order by Phone

##### Connect with GAO To Report Fraud, Waste, and Abuse in Federal Programs Media Relations Congressional Relations General Inquiries

The Government Accountability Office, the audit, evaluation, and investigative
arm of Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting its constitutional
responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the
federal government for the American people. GAO examines the use of public
funds; evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides analyses,
recommendations, and other assistance to help Congress make informed
oversight, policy, and funding decisions. GAO’s commitment to good government
is reflected in its core values of accountability, integrity, and reliability.

The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is
[through our website. Each weekday afternoon, GAO posts on its website newly](https://www.gao.gov/)
[released reports, testimony, and correspondence. You can also subscribe to](https://www.gao.gov/subscribe/index.php)
GAO’s email updates to receive notification of newly posted products.

The price of each GAO publication reflects GAO’s actual cost of production and
distribution and depends on the number of pages in the publication and whether
the publication is printed in color or black and white. Pricing and ordering
[information is posted on GAO’s website, https://www.gao.gov/ordering.htm.](https://www.gao.gov/ordering.htm)

Place orders by calling (202) 512-6000, toll free (866) 801-7077, or
TDD (202) 512-2537.

Orders may be paid for using American Express, Discover Card, MasterCard,
Visa, check, or money order. Call for additional information.

[Connect with GAO on X, LinkedIn, Instagram, and YouTube.](https://x.com/usgao)
[Subscribe to our Email Updates. Listen to our Podcasts.](https://www.gao.gov/about/contact-us/stay-connected)
Visit GAO on the web at https://www.gao.gov.

Contact FraudNet:

Website: [https://www.gao.gov/about/what-gao-does/fraudnet](https://www.gao.gov/about/what-gao-does/fraudnet)

Automated answering system: (800) 424-5454

Sarah Kaczmarek, Managing Director, Media@gao.gov

David A. Powner, Acting Managing Director, CongRel@gao.gov

[https://www.gao.gov/about/contact-us](https://www.gao.gov/about/contact-us)

Please Print on Recycled Paper.