# Cybersecurity Regulations: Additional Industry Perspectives on the Impact, Progress, Challenges, and Opportunities of Harmonization

**Report:** GAO-26-108685 | **Published:** 2026-03-05 | **Source:** [U.S. Government Accountability Office](https://www.gao.gov/products/gao-26-108685)

---

**441 G St. N.W.**
**Washington, DC 20548**

March 5, 2026

The Honorable Gary C. Peters
Ranking Member
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
United States Senate

The Honorable Andrew R. Garbarino

Chairman
Committee on Homeland Security
House of Representatives

**Cybersecurity Regulations: Additional Industry Perspectives on the Impact, Progress,**
**Challenges, and Opportunities of Harmonization**

Our nation increasingly depends on computer-based information systems and electronic data to
execute fundamental operations and to process, maintain, and report crucial information.
Further, nearly all federal and nonfederal operations, including the nation’s critical infrastructure,
are supported by these systems and data. Consequently, the safety of these systems and data
is critical to public confidence and the nation’s security, economy, and welfare.

GAO has identified cybersecurity as a government-wide high-risk area for more than 25 years.
Recognizing a growing threat, we first designated information security as a government-wide
high-risk area in 1997. Subsequently, in 2003, we expanded the information security high-risk
area to include the cybersecurity of critical infrastructure. We further expanded this high-risk
area in 2015 to include protecting the privacy of personally identifiable information. In our most
recent update on this high-risk area in February 2025, we reiterated that fully establishing and
implementing a national cybersecurity strategy was needed to protect the nation’s information
systems and infrastructure. [1]

You asked us to convene a series of discussions with industry representatives to gather their
perspectives on federal progress in harmonizing cybersecurity regulations, and to provide
periodic updates on these discussions. Our first report in this series was issued in July 2025. [2]
This is the second such report and summarizes the views shared by selected industry
participants in a September 2025 panel. Participants commented on the impact of federal
cybersecurity regulations and federal agencies’ progress, challenges, and opportunities in
harmonizing these regulations.

To gather these perspectives, GAO convened a panel discussion on September 17, 2025. The
panel included seven representatives, each from different critical infrastructure sectors:

1 GAO, _High-Risk Series: Heightened Attention Could Save Billions More and Improve Government Efficiency and_
_Effectiveness,_ [GAO-25-107743 (Washington, D.C.: Feb. 25, 2025).](http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-25-107743)

2 GAO, _Cybersecurity Regulations: Industry Perspectives on the Impact, Progress, Challenges, and Opportunities of_
_Harmonization,_ [GAO-25-108436 (Washington, D.C.: July 30, 2025).](https://www.gao.gov/products/gao-25-108436)

Page 1 GAO-26-108685 Cybersecurity Regulations

communications, energy, financial services, healthcare and public health, information
technology, transportation systems, and water and wastewater systems. The representatives
included directors of information technology and cybersecurity, chief information officers,
general counsel and regulatory affairs specialists. We committed to treat industry participants’
comments made during the panel with confidentiality to encourage them to speak candidly,
unless they otherwise agreed to attribution in specific cases. The information in this report
summarizes the industry participants’ perspectives and the points that were raised. [3] The
summary of panelists’ viewpoints does not necessarily reflect a unanimous opinion of the panel
or a collective view of the panelists’ respective sectors. See enclosure I for additional
information on our objectives, scope, and methodology. For a list of panel participants, see
enclosure II.

We conducted our work from August 2025 to March 2026 in accordance with all applicable
sections of GAO’s Quality Assurance Framework. The framework requires that we plan and
perform the engagement to obtain sufficient and appropriate evidence to meet our stated
objectives and to discuss any limitations to our work. We believe that the information and data
obtained, and the analysis conducted, provide a reasonable basis for any findings and
conclusions in this product.

**Background**

Cyber-based intrusions and attacks on both federal and nonfederal systems by malicious actors
are becoming more common and disruptive. These attacks threaten the continuity, confidence,
integrity, and accountability of essential systems. Moreover, the risks to these systems—
including insider threats from witting or unwitting employees, mounting threats from around the
globe, and the rise of new and more destructive attacks—collectively threaten to compromise
sensitive data and destabilize critical operations.

Because the private sector owns most of the nation’s critical infrastructure (see fig. 1), it is vital
that the public and private sectors work together to protect these assets and systems. [4]

3 For the purposes of quantifying the number of industry participants who made certain statements during the panels,
“few” means one to two participants, “several” means three to four, and "most" means five or more participants.

4 The term “critical infrastructure” refers to systems and assets, whether physical or virtual, so vital to the United
States that their incapacity or destruction would have a debilitating impact on security, national economic security,
national public health or safety, or any combination of these. 42 U.S.C. § 5195c(e). Federal policy identifies 16 critical
infrastructures: chemical; commercial facilities; communications; critical manufacturing; dams; defense industrial
base; emergency services; energy; financial services; food and agriculture; government facilities; health care and
public health; information technology; nuclear reactors, materials, and waste; transportation systems; and water and
wastewater systems.

Page 2 GAO-26-108685 Cybersecurity Regulations

**Figure 1: The 16 Critical Infrastructure Sectors**

Toward this end, various federal agencies are responsible for assisting the private sector in
protecting critical infrastructure, including enhancing cybersecurity. In doing so, federal agencies
have issued a variety of regulations to help protect the nation’s critical infrastructure. However,
according to the Office of the National Cyber Director, when critical infrastructure sectors are
subject to multiple cybersecurity regulations, the result can be conflicting guidance,
inconsistencies, and redundancies.

Harmonization refers to the development and adoption of consistent standards and regulations.
Such consistency is important when critical infrastructure sectors are subject to multiple
cybersecurity regulations so that these requirements will not overlap, duplicate, or contradict
each other. In June 2024, we testified that consistent cybersecurity regulations could help
protect against the increasing risks that threaten our nation’s critical infrastructure sectors. [5] At
that time, we also discussed the importance of harmonized regulations in avoiding adverse
impacts, such as conflicting incident reporting requirements.

We have previously identified concerns around varying federal cybersecurity requirements and
the implementation of those requirements. For example, in May 2020, we identified adverse
impacts that varying cybersecurity requirements issued by selected federal agencies and
related compliance assessments had on state government agencies. [6] We made
recommendations to the five agencies to improve coordination with respect to their
cybersecurity requirements and assessments of state government agencies. Of the 12
recommendations we made in this area, the agencies have implemented 11 and partially
addressed the one remaining.

Further, in July 2024, we reported on the Department of Homeland Security’s efforts to
implement federal cyber incident reporting requirements and the challenges with harmonizing
these requirements. [7] Though we did not have recommendations, we identified challenges

5 GAO, _Efforts Initiated to Harmonize Regulations, but Significant Work Remains,_ [GAO-24-107602 (Washington, D.C.:](http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-24-107602)
June 5, 2024).

6 GAO, _Cybersecurity: Selected Federal Agencies Need to Coordinate on Requirements and Assessments of States_,
[GAO-20-123 (Washington, D.C.: May 27, 2020).](http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-20-123)

7 GAO, _Critical Infrastructure Protection: DHS Has Efforts Underway to Implement Federal Incident Reporting_
_Requirements,_ GAO-24-106917 (Washington, D.C.: July 30, 2024).

Page 3 GAO-26-108685 Cybersecurity Regulations

including differences in the (1) definitions of reportable cyber incidents, (2) timelines and triggers
for when reports must be made, (3) contents of cyber incident reports, and (4) how the reports
are submitted to federal agencies.

Several actions have been taken in recent years to improve federal coordination on cyber
regulations.

- Congress enacted the Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act of 2022
(CIRCIA). [8] CIRCIA established a Cyber Incident Reporting Council to coordinate, deconflict,
and harmonize federal incident reporting requirements. [9]

- The White House established a national cybersecurity strategy in March 2023 and national
critical infrastructure policy in April 2024. [10]

- In support of the national cybersecurity strategy, the Office of the National Cyber Director
issued a request for information that invited public comments on opportunities for, and
obstacles to, harmonizing cybersecurity regulations. [11]

- In July 2024 and May 2025, proposed legislation known as the Streamlining Federal
Cybersecurity Regulations Act was introduced in the Senate, which included requirements
aimed at reducing duplicative or contradictory cybersecurity regulations. [12]

**Industry Identified Impacts, Progress, Challenges, and Opportunities in Harmonizing**
**Cybersecurity Regulations**

Industry panelists identified positive and negative impacts resulting from federal cybersecurity
regulations and viewed federal progress in harmonizing them as limited. Panelists also identified
several challenges and opportunities related to such harmonization efforts. The views of
participants in our September 2025 panel were generally similar to the views of industry
participants from our May 2025 panels. Industry participants in our September 2025 panel also
offered several additional perspectives and examples regarding impacts, progress, challenges,
and opportunities.

Positive and Negative Impacts on Industry

Impacts identified in the panel were mostly negative. However, industry participants identified a
few positive impacts of cybersecurity regulations, including helpful federal cybersecurity
guidance:

- **Cybersecurity assessments.** One participant stated that the National Credit Union
Administration had adopted the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council’s

8 Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act of 2022, enacted as division Y of the Consolidated
Appropriations Act, 2022, Pub. L. No. 117-103, div. Y, 136 Stat. 49, 1038 (Mar. 15, 2022).

9 Pub. L. No. 117-103, div. Y, sec. 103(a), 136 Stat. 49, 1054 (Mar. 15, 2022).

10 The White House, _National Cybersecurity Strategy_, (Washington, D.C.: March 2023) and _National Security_
_Memorandum on Critical Infrastructure Security and Resilience_, National Security Memorandum-22 (Washington,
D.C.: Apr. 30, 2024).

11 Request for Information on Cyber Regulatory Harmonization, Request for Information: Opportunities for and
Obstacles to Harmonizing Cybersecurity Regulations, 88 Fed. Reg. 55,694 (Aug. 16, 2023).

12 Streamlining Federal Cybersecurity Regulations Act, S.4630, 118 th Cong. (2024) and Streamlining Federal
Cybersecurity Regulations Act, S.1875, 119 [th] Cong. (2025).

Page 4 GAO-26-108685 Cybersecurity Regulations

Cybersecurity Assessment Tools, which worked to provide threat assessments and provide
a single location to cross-reference multiple cybersecurity frameworks. The participant noted
that the tools had since been replaced by the National Credit Union Administration’s
Automated Cybersecurity Evaluation Toolbox, which helps to provide cybersecurity
evaluations. [13]

- **Federal guidance.** According to a few participants, the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency’s efforts to engage with industry to provide free guidance, cybersecurity
tools, and risk assessments have been helpful. For example, one participant stated that the
agency promoted simplifying harmonization for different regulations, increasing
cybersecurity hygiene, and offering public infrastructure scans to identify vulnerabilities with
weekly reporting. [14]

However, as noted above, industry participants identified mostly negative impacts experienced
by their industries because of multiple and overlapping cybersecurity regulations and how this
has resulted in redundant work and conflicts:

- **Regulation overlap.** According to several participants, sectors are often subject to multiple
regulatory frameworks which can result in potentially duplicative and overly burdensome
cybersecurity requirements. For example, one participant noted the cybersecurity disclosure
rules promulgated by the Securities and Exchange Commission overlap with sector-specific
standards, such as those from banking regulators. [15] Another participant stated that federal
regulations that go beyond their industry’s baseline standard are duplicative and do not
result in a better outcome.

- **Definitions and requirements within regulations.** Several participants noted that
cybersecurity definitions and requirements can be vague or may not account for sector
differences. For example, one participant stated that regulations often use similar definitions,
but without standardization of terminology, it can be difficult to fully address and understand
the requirements of competing standards. A specific example of this was also illustrated in
our May 2025 panel when a few participants noted that there is greater use of the term
“operational technology.” However, when the term is vaguely defined, it is unclear how to
account for the different safety and cybersecurity needs of operational technology compared
to traditional IT systems. [16] In addition, several participants stated that different frameworks
have similar controls and reporting requirements but have small differences that can create
unnecessary overlap and confusion. One participant suggested this was because, in their
view, regulatory agencies were seemingly developing definitions and requirements without
coordinating with other regulators in the same sector.

13 The Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council developed the Cybersecurity Assessment Tools in June
2015 to provide a voluntary assessment tool to help financial institutions identify cybersecurity risks. The tools were
sunset on August 31, 2025. The National Credit Union Administration developed a similar toolkit in October 2021, the
Automated Cybersecurity Evaluation Toolbox.

14 Cyber hygiene is a set of practices for managing the most common and pervasive cybersecurity risks.

15 The Securities and Exchange Commission has enhanced and standardized disclosures regarding cybersecurity
risk management, strategy, governance, and incidents by public companies that are subject to the reporting
requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.

16 Information technology (IT) refers to the technologies combined for networking, information processing, enterprise
data centers, and cloud systems. Operational technology (OT) is the hardware and software that monitors and
controls devices, processes, and infrastructure in industrial settings.

Page 5 GAO-26-108685 Cybersecurity Regulations

- **Incident reporting requirements.** Participants felt that incident reporting is often
duplicative, and that there are inconsistent incident reporting requirements. A few
participants said that there can be differences in the amount of detail, time frames, and
thresholds required by agencies for reporting cyber incidents. For example, one participant
stated that incident reporting and data collection requirements under CIRCIA would likely be
burdensome on top of other existing cyber incident reporting requirements. [17] Specifically,
one participant stated that their sector already requires incident reporting within one hour to
their regulatory agency and CIRCIA would require additional reporting requirements within
72 hours. Additionally, one participant stated that it can be both difficult and technically
burdensome to collect information for multiple entities within a short amount of time to meet
reporting requirements.

**One Participant’s View on the Impact of Overlap, Duplication, or Conflicts in Federal**
**Cybersecurity Regulations**

_“We want to spend time responding to an incident instead of checking boxes complying with_
_redundant reporting requirements.”_
Source: Participant in the industry panel on cybersecurity regulation harmonization. | GAO-26-108685

While difficult to estimate the impact of cyber regulations due to sector differences, several
participants generally agreed that industry expends significant resources handling overlapping,
duplicative, or conflicting federal cybersecurity regulations. Doing so diverts resources away
from the critical mission of securing systems and can impact:

- **Cost.** According to most participants, cost is a significant factor when dealing with
cybersecurity regulations and the associated costs make it difficult to meet cybersecurity
requirements. This is especially true for small organizations with fewer resources.

**One Participant’s View on the Impact of Current Federal Cybersecurity Regulations**

_“Do I focus on compliance, or do I focus on securing my infrastructure?”_
Source: Participant in the industry panel on cybersecurity regulation harmonization. | GAO-26-108685

- **Time.** Several participants stated that time spent complying with potentially duplicative
requirements and reporting to multiple agencies limits the time they can spend on incident
response or strengthening cybersecurity infrastructure. For example, one participant stated
that compliance requires cost and resource evaluation of what to address, which can lead to
employees focusing less on security improvements.

- **Staff expertise.** Several participants stated that smaller organizations have difficulties
meeting cybersecurity requirements due to the lack of resources. For example, several
participants stated that small organizations may lack staff with the expertise needed to
address reporting requirements.

17 CIRCIA requires the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency to promulgate regulations to implement the
act’s reporting provisions. In April 2024, the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency published its proposed
rule under CIRCIA for public comment. The rule is intended to help prioritize efforts to combat cyber threats and
ransomware activities and to enhance capabilities related to federal sharing of incident reporting.

Page 6 GAO-26-108685 Cybersecurity Regulations

Industry participants noted that unharmonized federal cybersecurity regulations have different
impacts on organizations of varying sizes.

- **Small organizations** are generally required to follow the same regulations as larger
organizations but often do not have the compliance staff necessary to do so. They often
have fewer, if any, resources dedicated to compliance, which places a greater burden on
these companies. Several participants stated that small organizations can sometimes lack
the resources or specialized IT personnel needed to fully address federal cybersecurity
regulations. For example, one participant stated that cybersecurity is rarely a priority due to
a lack of training surrounding federal and state regulations. A few participants stated that
diverting resources to focus on compliance can negatively impact organizations by removing
resources from securing infrastructure.

- **Large organizations** typically have more resources dedicated to compliance; however, they
are often subject to additional foreign regulations depending on their sector and whether
they operate internationally. A few participants stated that larger organizations often have to
comply with competing regulations and jurisdictions which can lead to increased costs.
Participants noted that standardizing foreign and federal requirements and definitions would
help to reduce regulatory burdens for businesses that operate internationally.

Federal Agencies Made Progress in Harmonizing Cybersecurity Regulations, but Work Remains

A few participants stated that federal government has demonstrated some interest in working
with industry to provide guidance and resources on cybersecurity best practices. Specifically, a
few participants agreed that the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency had worked
with industry to provide free cybersecurity assessments, tools, and guidance. One participant
also noted that the agency, along with the Department of Energy's Office for Cybersecurity,
Energy Security, and Emergency Response consistently coordinated with them on issues
related to their sector, including providing guidance and best practices for supply chain security.
Additionally, several participants agreed that the National Institute of Standards and
Technology’s Cybersecurity Framework has provided their industries with cybersecurity best
practices and baseline security measures. However, several participants agreed that the federal
government has made limited progress toward harmonizing cybersecurity regulations.

Federal Agencies Continue to Face Challenges to Harmonizing Cybersecurity Regulations

Industry participants identified a few challenges, including the following barriers, federal
agencies face when harmonizing cybersecurity regulations:

- **Lack of standard definitions and information requirements.** Several participants felt that
agencies at times develop unique cybersecurity definitions that differ from industry, resulting
in inconsistent terminologies that cannot be widely applied and reused. Federal, state, and
industry-specific standards may contain unique or special information, but a few participants
stated this leads to unnecessary redundancies, and universal definitions would be helpful.

**One Participant’s View on the Challenges with Federal Cybersecurity Regulations**

_“When it comes to standards and definitions, you have a lot of different regulations [with] state_
_and federal…and they’re all basically saying the same thing. It’s challenging to get through all_
_the wordsmithing…some kind of standardization…across all the different [regulations] would be_
_helpful.”_
Source: Participant in the industry panel on cybersecurity regulation harmonization. | GAO-26-108685

Page 7 GAO-26-108685 Cybersecurity Regulations

- **Agency reporting requirements compete with industry priorities.** Agencies want timely
reporting about cyber incidents, but participants felt that these requirements often interfere
with industry’s priority to mitigate and resolve threats. Several participants said that their
industries prioritize resolving cybersecurity risks over compliance. Further, several
participants stated that meeting reporting requirements often take away from time and effort
applied to securing cybersecurity infrastructure.

Industry Identified Additional Opportunities for Harmonizing Federal Cybersecurity Regulations

Industry participants identified near- and long-term opportunities for harmonizing federal
cybersecurity regulations.

- **Harmonize incident reporting.** A few participants said that CIRCIA has potential to achieve
harmonization among various regulations. For example, a few participants stated that such
harmonization should include properly scoping reporting requirements with a clear
understanding of the cybersecurity risk being mitigated.

- **Renew and revise legislation.** Several participants stated that the reauthorization of the
Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act of 2015 was important to maintain industry
protections for information sharing. One participant stated that that this legislation should be
regularly updated to account for new or emerging technologies. A participant also stated that
opportunities may exist to remove outdated requirements, such as those under the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, to further harmonize future sets of
requirements.

- **Consider establishing a working group of federal agencies to harmonize**
**cybersecurity regulations.** One participant noted that additional progress in harmonizing
federal regulations depends on agencies working together, such as through a working group
or similar mechanism, to address differences between terminology, reporting requirements,
and information sharing agreements. Additionally, one participant stated that establishing a
single entity with authority over regulatory consistency could be beneficial for purposes of
cybersecurity regulatory harmonization. However, several other participants stated that such
an entity could be problematic for industry by offering a one-size-fits-all approach and a lack
of specialization for each sector in regard to regulation.

- **Deconflict regulations.** Several participants noted that the Office of the National Cyber
Director has the opportunity to work with other federal cybersecurity agencies to deconflict
cybersecurity regulations. Specifically, these participants stated that it would be beneficial to
industry to give the Office of the National Cyber Director a clear mandate to address
differences within federal agency terminology, reporting regimes, and guidance to work
toward harmonizing federal regulations.

**One Participant’s View on Opportunities to Harmonize Cybersecurity Regulations**

_“Giving the Office of the National Cyber Director a clear mandate and authority to manage_
_independent regulatory agencies and others to harmonize reporting regimes would be a really_
_big step forward [toward harmonization].”_
Source: Participant in the industry panel on cybersecurity regulation harmonization. | GAO-26-108685

- **Establish metrics for regulatory effectiveness.** Several participants noted that metrics for
how agencies assess the effectiveness of cybersecurity-related regulation could be helpful.
One participant stated that evaluating the economic benefit of metrics measured against
reporting timetables could help industry better understand the potential benefits of
regulation. For example, one participant stated that it could be helpful to evaluate

Page 8 GAO-26-108685 Cybersecurity Regulations

regulations based on their benefit to industry—specifically, whether there is economic
benefit to reporting in 48 hours versus 72 hours.

- **Consolidate reporting.** A few participants stated that it would be helpful to centralize
reporting through a single reporting mechanism managed by one functional regulator for
each sector for ease of access, familiarity, and standardized industry requirements. This
would reduce the need to complete multiple reports to different federal agencies.

- **Standardize terminology.** One participant stated that if the same terminology is used
across different frameworks, then the definitions should be standardized. Another participant
also noted that the rules under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act may
define reporting time frames of days while another regulation may use hours. Another
participant also noted that aligning U.S.-based cybersecurity terminology with foreign
definitions may be helpful in a regulatory context.

- **Make shared information confidential.** A few participants stated it would be important that
cybersecurity incident information used by agencies will not be used to penalize or
negatively impact entities who submit the information. One participant stated that without
guarantees that the information is confidential, Freedom of Information Act exempt, and not
to be used for enforcement action or retaliation, then it would be difficult to have
conversations surrounding cybersecurity. [18] Additionally, a few participants stated that it
would be important to separate the entities responsible for enforcement from those who are
responsible for securing cybersecurity systems, otherwise industry may fear retaliation.

**Third Party Comments**

We provided a copy of this report to the seven panel participants for review and comment. Five
of the participants provided comments via email, stating that they agreed with our
characterization of their views in the report. The other two participants did not provide
comments on the report.

**- - - - -**

We are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees and other
interested parties. In addition, the report is available at no charge on the GAO website at
[https://www.gao.gov.](https://www.gao.gov/)

18 5 U.S.C. § 552. The Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requires federal agencies to provide the public with access
to certain government records with certain specified exemptions.

Page 9 GAO-26-108685 Cybersecurity Regulations

If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at
[HinchmanD@gao.gov. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Media](mailto:HinchmanD@gao.gov)
Relations may be found on the last page of this report. In addition, Joshua Leiling (Assistant
Director), David Hong (Analyst in Charge), Amanda Andrade, Timothy Barry, Madison Brown,
Brandon Cox, Jonnie Genova, Evan Nelson Senie, Sarah Ong, and Walter Vance made key
contributions to this report.

David Hinchman
Director, Information Technology and Cybersecurity

Enclosures

Page 10 GAO-26-108685 Cybersecurity Regulations

**Enclosure I: Objective, Scope, and Methodology**

Our objective for this report was to summarize industry views on the impact of federal
cybersecurity regulations and federal agencies’ progress, challenges, and opportunities in
harmonizing them. This is the second report in a series on this topic and summarizes the views
shared by selected industry participants in a September 2025 panel. Our first report in this
series was issued in July 2025. [19]

To conduct our work, we identified industry representatives based on public comments their
organizations submitted to Regulations.gov during comment periods for the Cyber Incident
Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act reporting requirements posted by the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency [20] and the Request for Information: Cyber Regulatory
Harmonization posted by the Office of the National Cyber Director. [21] We then grouped the
industry organizations and their representatives into different critical infrastructure sectors.

We removed comments that were not affiliated with an industry organization in one of the 16
critical infrastructure sectors as well as comments from the government services and facilities
sector because our objective was focused on establishing an industry perspective. We screened
comments to ensure they were from a relevant organization and that they contained substantive
comments. This screening process led us to remove three other sectors because no substantive
comments were found for the dams, commercial facilities, and emergency services sectors.
These steps reduced the number of critical infrastructure sectors in our sample of comments
from 16 to 12. We also removed comments provided by panelists who contributed to our July
2025 report. [22] This further reduced the number of critical infrastructure sectors in our sample
from 12 to nine because there were no remaining comments from organizations affiliated with
the defense industrial base, nuclear, and food and agriculture sectors. [23]

We then used a randomized, ordered list of the comments to select participants from
organizations that provided comments and were associated with the nine remaining critical
infrastructure sectors. In doing so, we contacted potential panelists via email. When potential
panelists did not respond by the requested deadline or were not available, we continued our
outreach to the next potential panelist in the randomized order list of comments. We repeated
this process until we identified a stakeholder from each sector. While we contacted industry
representatives in each of the nine sectors, only seven were available to participate in the panel.
The seven sectors with an industry representative available to participate in the panel were
communications, energy, financial services, healthcare and public health, information
technology, transportation, and water and wastewater systems.

19 GAO-25-108436.

20 Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act (CIRCIA) Reporting
Requirements, 89 Fed. Reg. 23,644 (Apr. 4, 2024).

21 Request for Information on Cyber Regulatory Harmonization, Request for Information: Opportunities for and
Obstacles to Harmonizing Cybersecurity Regulations, 88 Fed. Reg. 55,694 (Aug. 16, 2023).

22 GAO-25-108436.

23 The nine remaining sectors selected to participate in the panel include chemical, communications, critical
manufacturing, energy, financial services, healthcare and public health, information technology, transportation, and
water and wastewater systems.

Page 11 GAO-26-108685 Cybersecurity Regulations

We then convened one 3-hour panel on September 17, 2025, with seven panelists representing
industry organizations affiliated with the seven different sectors. We obtained a range of
perspectives on the current state of federal cybersecurity regulations and how they impact
different critical infrastructure sectors, the progress and challenges industry participants have
seen from recent harmonization efforts, and opportunities they believe will come from continuing
efforts. We reviewed the discussion of the panel and identified overlapping points and
overarching themes for each topic. For the purposes of quantifying the number of industry
participants who made certain statements during the panels, “few” means one to two
participants, “several” means three to four, and "most" means five or more participants.

The information in this report summarizes the industry participants’ perspectives and the points
that were raised. The summary of panelists’ viewpoints does not necessarily reflect a
unanimous opinion of the panel or a collective view of the panelists’ respective sectors. We
offered each participant the chance to present alternative views. We also committed to handle
with confidentiality industry participants’ comments made during the panel discussion to
encourage them to speak candidly, unless they otherwise agreed to attribution in specific cases.
In addition to the panel, we also reviewed related GAO and federal agency reports related to
cybersecurity harmonization.

We conducted our work from August 2025 to March 2026 in accordance with all applicable
sections of GAO’s Quality Assurance Framework. The framework requires that we plan and
perform the engagement to obtain sufficient and appropriate evidence to meet our stated
objectives and to discuss any limitations to our work. We believe that the information and data
obtained, and the analysis conducted, provide a reasonable basis for any findings and
conclusions in this product.

Page 12 GAO-26-108685 Cybersecurity Regulations

**Enclosure II: Panel Participation**

We convened a 3-hour panel of industry participants from multiple critical infrastructure sectors,
selected randomly from public comments on a proposed rule for CIRCIA implementation and a
request for information from the Office of the National Cyber Director on views regarding cyber
regulatory harmonization. The panel was held virtually on September 17, 2025. The seven
industry participants who attended the panel and represented different critical infrastructure
sectors are listed below.

**Tara Hairston** Alliance for Automotive Innovation (transportation systems)

**Stephanie Kiel** Google LLC (information technology)

**Andrew Morris** America’s Credit Unions (financial services)

**Loretta Polk** NCTA - The Internet & Television Association (communications)

**Dave Roberts** AlexRenew (water and wastewater systems)

**Dr. Steven** American Academy of Family Physicians (healthcare and public health)
**Waldren**

**Bill Zuretti** Electric Power Supply Association (energy)

Page 13 GAO-26-108685 Cybersecurity Regulations

This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the
United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety
without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain
copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be
necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately.

# GAO’s Mission Obtaining Copies of GAO Reports and Testimony

## Order by Phone

# Connect with GAO To Report Fraud, Waste, and Abuse in Federal Programs Media Relations Congressional Relations General Inquiries

The Government Accountability Office, the audit, evaluation, and investigative
arm of Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting its constitutional
responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the
federal government for the American people. GAO examines the use of public
funds; evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides analyses,
recommendations, and other assistance to help Congress make informed
oversight, policy, and funding decisions. GAO’s commitment to good government
is reflected in its core values of accountability, integrity, and reliability.

The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is
[through our website. Each weekday afternoon, GAO posts on its website newly](https://www.gao.gov/)
[released reports, testimony, and correspondence. You can also subscribe to](https://www.gao.gov/subscribe/index.php)
GAO’s email updates to receive notification of newly posted products.

The price of each GAO publication reflects GAO’s actual cost of production and
distribution and depends on the number of pages in the publication and whether
the publication is printed in color or black and white. Pricing and ordering
[information is posted on GAO’s website, https://www.gao.gov/ordering.htm.](https://www.gao.gov/ordering.htm)

Place orders by calling (202) 512-6000, toll free (866) 801-7077, or
TDD (202) 512-2537.

Orders may be paid for using American Express, Discover Card, MasterCard,
Visa, check, or money order. Call for additional information.

[Connect with GAO on X, LinkedIn, Instagram, and YouTube.](https://x.com/usgao)
[Subscribe to our Email Updates. Listen to our Podcasts.](https://www.gao.gov/about/contact-us/stay-connected)
Visit GAO on the web at https://www.gao.gov.

Contact FraudNet:

Website: [https://www.gao.gov/about/what-gao-does/fraudnet](https://www.gao.gov/about/what-gao-does/fraudnet)

Automated answering system: (800) 424-5454

Sarah Kaczmarek, Managing Director, Media@gao.gov

David A. Powner, Acting Managing Director, CongRel@gao.gov

[https://www.gao.gov/about/contact-us](https://www.gao.gov/about/contact-us)

Please Print on Recycled Paper.