# Foreign Assistance: Opportunities Exist for Agencies to Improve Their Management of Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Risks

**Report:** GAO-26-108945 | **Published:** 2026-03-17 | **Source:** [U.S. Government Accountability Office](https://www.gao.gov/products/gao-26-108945)

---

## Highlights

### What GAO Found

No area of the federal government is immune to fraud, waste, or abuse. GAO 
estimates that the federal government loses between $233 billion and $521 
billion annually to fraud, based on 2018-2022 data. Delivering foreign assistance 
can involve specific challenges that increase fraud, waste and abuse risks, such 
as the presence of conflict in a country and the urgency of providing life-saving 
aid. GAO’s work in this area has highlighted several instances of actual and 
potential fraud, waste, and abuse in foreign assistance in countries such as 
Somalia, Afghanistan, and Mexico. For example, GAO reported on a 2023 United 
Nations assessment in Somalia that found widespread and systemic diversion of 
aid, primarily cash assistance. As part of this diversion, beneficiaries reported 
being required or coerced into paying a significant portion of their aid to those 
managing the camps where the assistance was distributed, or others. 
 
Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Definitions and Examples 
 
GAO’s work has identified useful practices and controls in place to manage fraud 
risks at some agencies. For example, U.S. Agency for International 
Development’s (USAID) Bureau for Humanitarian Affairs tracked all reported 
allegations, including fraud, across its awards and identified trends to support its 
oversight efforts. The Department of State and USAID also maintained 
processes for reviewing past performance of potential prime partners.  
However, GAO also identified systematic weaknesses in agencies’ efforts to 
manage fraud and other risks. For example, State and USAID did not require 
fraud awareness training, limiting assurance that their staff could identify fraud 
risks. State and USAID also had weaknesses in their screening and vetting of 
international organizations and oversight of subawardees, which increased 
vulnerabilities to risks, such as fraud. Further, the U.S. African Development 
Foundation (USADF) lacked internal policies and processes to manage fraud and 
other risks. Treasury officials that supported USADF contracting told GAO that 
USADF procurement officials also engaged in questionable practices when 
making foreign assistance awards, such as steering contracts to former USADF 
contractual employees. USADF’s Director of Financial Management was later 
criminally charged by the Department of Justice.

### Why GAO Did This Study

Foreign assistance is used to support 
U.S. foreign policy by providing 
resources to countries that 
policymakers have deemed to be 
strategically important, countries in 
conflict, and populations in need. The 
complex environments in which U.S. 
foreign assistance is often delivered 
have inherent risks for fraud, waste, and 
abuse. These risks must be recognized 
and better managed to fulfill programs 
and protect taxpayer dollars.  
Fraud prevention is key as attempting to 
prosecute individuals and entities after 
they have committed fraud addresses a 
small fraction of fraudulent activity, 
requires significant time and resources, 
and returns only a portion, if anything, 
of what was lost. Tactics of those who 
commit fraud are constantly evolving. 
As such, agencies should strive to 
continuously improve anti-fraud efforts 
to more efficiently and effectively 
prevent, detect, and respond to fraud.  
This statement focuses on (1) specific 
risks and examples of fraud, waste, and 
abuse associated with foreign 
assistance and (2) useful practices and 
weaknesses in fraud risk management 
in foreign assistance identified through 
past GAO work. This statement is 
based on a body of work of selected 
reports GAO published from July 2015 
to January 2026 addressing fraud risk 
management in foreign assistance.

### What GAO Recommends

Since July 2016, GAO has made at 
least 51 recommendations to support 
the management of fraud and other 
risks for agencies delivering foreign 
assistance. While agencies have 
implemented 22 of these 
recommendations, addressing the 
remaining 29 recommendations would 
improve risk management and better 
enable agencies to prevent fraud, 
waste, and abuse.

---

## Letter

**Letter**

Chairman Mills, Ranking Member Moskowitz, and Members of the
Subcommittee:

I appreciate the opportunity to discuss fraud, waste, and abuse and the
work GAO has done regarding fraud risk management in foreign
assistance.

Foreign assistance supports U.S foreign policy goals by providing
resources to countries that policymakers have deemed to be strategically
important, countries in conflict, and populations in need. Congress has
appropriated approximately $50 billion in 2026 for the Department of
State and other foreign affairs agencies and programs, including foreign
assistance. Most U.S. foreign assistance prior to 2025 was administered
by the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID); the U.S.
Departments of State (State), Agriculture, Health and Human Services,
the Treasury, and Defense; and the Millennium Challenge Corporation
(MCC). The current Administration has made changes to the U.S.
government entities administering foreign assistance, including ceasing
USAID’s administration of ongoing foreign aid as of July 1, 2025. State is
now poised to be the lead U.S. foreign assistance provider, having
assumed certain former USAID functions.

Foreign assistance is often delivered in complex environments with
inherent risks, such as fraud, waste, and abuse. [1] These risks must be
managed effectively to ensure assistance delivery and taxpayer dollars
are safeguarded. While most federal spending, including foreign
assistance, is not lost to fraud, every dollar or resource that is diverted to
fraudsters damages the federal government’s ability to achieve its goals.
Direct financial losses from fraud place an increased burden on the
government’s financial outlook. Additionally, non-financial impacts and

1 Fraud involves obtaining a thing of value through willful misrepresentation. Willful
misrepresentation can be characterized by making material false statements of fact based
on actual knowledge, deliberate ignorance, or reckless disregard of falsity. Fraud risk
exists when individuals have an opportunity to engage in fraudulent activity. Waste is
squandering money or resources, even if not explicitly illegal, and abuse is behaving
improperly or unreasonably or misusing one’s position or authority.

losses erode public trust in government and hinder agencies’ efforts to
execute their missions effectively and efficiently. [2]

While it is impossible to eliminate fraud completely, agencies can manage
the risk more effectively by leveraging our recommendations, guidance,
and resources for fraud prevention. And prevention is key. Prosecuting
individuals and entities after they have committed fraud addresses only a
small fraction of identified fraudulent activity, requires significant time and
resources, and often recovers only a portion, if anything, of what was lost.
The tactics of those who commit fraud are constantly evolving and so
should the U.S. government’s approach to subverting them. To be clear,
managing fraud risk is never finished. The goal is to continuously improve
anti-fraud efforts to better prevent fraud before it occurs, detect it sooner
when it happens, and respond more effectively than we have in the past.

This statement focuses on (1) specific risks and examples of fraud,
waste, and abuse associated with foreign assistance and (2) useful
practices and weaknesses in fraud risk management in foreign assistance
identified through past GAO work.

This statement is based on a body of work of selected reports we
published from July 2015 to January 2026 addressing fraud risk
management in foreign assistance. More detailed information on the
scope and methodology of our prior work can be found within the specific
reports on which this statement is based. These reports are listed on the
Related GAO Products page at the end of this statement. We conducted
the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our
audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.

2 We have previously reported that the federal government faces an unsustainable longterm fiscal future. GAO, _The Nation’s Fiscal Health: Strategy Needed as Debt Levels_
_Accelerate,_ [GAO-25-107714 (Washington, D.C.: Feb. 5, 2025). Improved efforts to](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-25-107714)
combat fraud, with an emphasis on prevention, can reduce the loss of federal dollars and
improve the federal government’s fiscal outlook.

#### Foreign Assistance Has Heightened Risks for Fraud, Waste, and Abuse

No area of the federal government is immune to fraud, waste, or abuse
(see fig. 1). We estimate that the federal government loses between $233
billion and $521 billion annually to fraud, based on 2018-2022 data. [3]
Fraud can come from within or from outside an organization. For
example, an employee, manager or executive within an organization may
commit fraud by deceiving their own organization through embezzling
funds or accepting bribes. Outside entities may also commit fraud against
an organization. For example, vendors may lie about the work they
performed, or grantees may claim reimbursement for activities they did
not perform.

**Figure 1: Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Definitions and Examples**

###### Delivering Foreign Assistance Presents Increased Risks

The delivery of foreign assistance can present some specific challenges
that increase fraud, waste, and abuse risks. These include:

3 GAO, _Fraud Risk Management: 2018-2022 Data Show Federal Government Loses an_
_Estimated $233 Billion to $521 Billion Annually to Fraud, Based on Various Risk_
_Environments,_ [GAO-24-105833 (Washington, D.C.: Apr. 16, 2024).](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-24-105833)

**Reliance on Implementing Partners for Delivering Assistance.** U.S.
foreign assistance is often delivered through award agreements with
partnering organizations that implement the assistance. These
implementing partners may enter into a sub-award agreement that
provides funds to sub-partner organizations to carry out the work. [4] During
the delivery of assistance, the U.S. Agency for International Development
(USAID) generally relied on partners’ own controls to prevent risks,
including fraud. As such, implementing partners and sub-partners play an
important role in the delivery and safeguarding of foreign assistance.
Therefore, the potential for fraud and other risks is greater if federal
agencies, implementing partners, and sub-partners do not have strong
controls. See the text box for examples of inadequate internal controls
that could increase vulnerabilities to fraud, waste, or abuse.

**Examples of Inadequate Internal Controls that Could Increase the Risk of Fraud, Waste, or Abuse**

 - Inadequate separation of duties.

 - Lack of or limited monitoring visits or inspection requirements.

 - Lack of or limited policies and guidance for award selection and management.

 - Limited or no requirements for awardees to monitor or report on sub awardee data or information.

 - Weak or limited counter fraud or antiterrorism clauses in delivery partner agreements and contracts.

 - Limited verification of beneficiary data.

 - Limited tracking and oversight of asset management or inventory systems.

 - Limited or no antifraud control environment (e.g. limited or no fraud training, fraud reporting mechanism, or regularly
communicated antifraud tone at all organizational levels).

 - Limited internal or compliance audits.

Source: GAO analysis of prior GAO reports. | GAO-26-108945

**Countries Experiencing Conflict.** Many factors complicate the delivery
of assistance to people living in conflict zones. For example, a dangerous
operating environment can limit access to certain geographic areas for
U.S. agency personnel and implementing partners, which can result in
managing U.S. assistance remotely. Lack of in-person oversight
increases the risk that assistance will be misused or diverted through
fraud or other means. For example, USAID officials who provided
assistance to Syria explained that implementing partners were unable to
consistently access project sites due to factors such as ongoing fighting,
bombing raids, and border closures. This limited partners’ ability to obtain

4 Implementing partners and sub-partners may be nongovernmental organizations (NGO),
government entities, or international organizations, which are typically composed of
multiple member states.

and verify progress. [5] Similarly, we found that USAID was often unable to
conduct regular site visits in conflict-affected areas, including Ukraine,
Nigeria, and Somalia, instead relying at times on other methods to detect
risks, such as reviewing partner’s financial information in regular reports
and additional communication with its partners. However, we also found
that partners in these countries also said they were often unable to safely
access some of their own implementation sites. [6]

**Urgency of Humanitarian Assistance and Life-saving Aid.** Disasters
and public emergencies present an additional challenge to combating
fraud. The need for urgent assistance can hinder the implementation of
effective controls to combat fraud. Agencies may need to develop new
programs or significantly expand existing ones, which can involve
increased risks. Further, both our work and that of the USAID Office of
Inspector General (OIG) have found that crisis environments, such as war
zones in Ukraine, Gaza, and Syria, are by their very nature unstable and
insecure. Substantial uncertainty and inaccessibility, coupled with the
rapid flow of large amounts of money, create prime opportunities for fraud
and diversion—risks that have intensified with the growing scale and
duration of humanitarian responses.

**Use of Local Organizations.** USAID set goals to work directly with local
partners to implement assistance in some countries. While working with
local organizations can improve the effectiveness and sustainability of
foreign assistance, it also potentially raises risks, including the risk of
fraud. Many local organizations are smaller than traditional development
organizations and may not have the capacity to implement large scale
programs, oversee and track substantial funding, and may have limited
experience in implementing financial controls or reporting requirements
Further, fraud risks can be greater in countries with high levels of
corruption.

**Presence of Terrorists or Other Sanctioned Entities.** Various U.S.
laws, regulations. and executive orders provide for U.S. sanctions on
specified groups, such as drug traffickers and terrorists. The risk
of providing assistance to sanctioned entities in violation of these laws,

5 GAO, _Syria Humanitarian Assistance: Some Risks of Providing Aid inside Syria_
_Assessed, but U.S. Agencies Could Improve Fraud Oversight._ [GAO-16-629. Washington,](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-16-629)
D.C.: July 14, 2016.

6 GAO, _Foreign Assistance: USAID Should Strengthen Risk Management in Conflict_
_Zones,_ [GAO-24-106192 (Washington, D.C.: Apr. 30, 2024).](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-24-106192)

###### GAO Work has Highlighted Examples of Fraud, Waste, and Abuse

regulations, and executive orders may be higher in conflict zones
because of the presence of terrorists or sanctioned entities contributing to
the conflict. This type of risk may require increased oversight of
assistance provided.

During our work examining foreign assistance programs of multiple
agencies, including USAID, State, and U.S. African Development
Foundation (USADF), we have identified or reported on various instances
of fraud, waste, or abuse or potential fraud under investigation.

**U.S. African Development Foundation.** We reported in 2025 that
USADF has faced allegations of fraud, waste, and abuse originating from
former staff. [7] These allegations included reports on the misuse of official
funds, fraudulent spending, conflicts of interest, and inappropriate,
abusive, and discriminatory management practices. According to a
Department of Justice press release, on January 30, 2026, the Director of
Financial Management of the USADF was charged and agreed to plead
guilty to accepting payments from a USADF contractor and lying to
federal law enforcement officers about those payments. According to the
Department of Justice, the USADF employee directed USADF funds to
the contractor for little to no work and arranged for USADF to pay vendors
and contractors through a Kenyan-based company that was owned by the
USADF contractor. The USADF employee and contractor had allegedly
known each other for over 20 years.

**Post-Delivery Food Aid Diversion in Somalia.** We reported that in July
2023, a United Nations assessment in Somalia found widespread and
systemic diversion of food aid, primarily cash assistance. [8] For example,
internally displaced beneficiaries reported being required or coerced into
paying the people managing the camps for the displaced, or other
individuals a significant portion—usually in cash—of the aid they had
received.

**Potential Fraud Under the Mérida Initiative.** We reported on several
potential fraud cases identified by State and USAID under the Mérida
Initiative, a partnership created to help reduce violence in Mexico and

7 GAO, _U.S. African Development Foundation: Strategic Approach Needed to Mitigate_
_Fraud Risks,_ [GAO-25-107574 (Washington, D.C.: Sep. 15, 2025).](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-25-107574)

8 GAO-24-106192

mitigate effects of the drug trade. [9] Both State and USAID officials told us
about cases of potential fraud involving Mérida funds in 2018 that
involved grantees overstating labor costs on invoices submitted for
repayment. We also reported on another case of potential fraud reported
to USAID in 2018 that involved a contractor who had awarded a
subcontract to an employee’s immediate relative without disclosure, in
violation of conflict-of-interest reporting requirements.

**Examples of Fraud, Waste, and Abuse in Afghanistan.** In a 2021
report, we highlighted multiple examples of fraud, waste, and abuse
identified in Afghanistan. [10] These included:

In 2009 we reported USAID-funded United Nations Office for Project
Services (UNOPS) grants were associated with findings of alleged
criminal actions and mismanaged funds, leaving USAID’s programs
vulnerable to fraud, waste, and abuse. A UN Procurement Task Force
in 2008 found instances of fraud, embezzlement, conversion of public
funds, conflict of interest, and severe mismanagement of USAIDfunded UNOPS projects in Afghanistan, including a $365.8 million
project to rehabilitate secondary roads. According to the allegations, a
UNOPS official diverted reconstruction funds for personal use,
including hundreds of thousands of dollars in USAID funds for rent, a
home renovation, and luxury items. The investigation found that the
UNOPS official repeatedly violated rules and regulations by severely
misappropriating project funds and by engaging in fraudulent and
unlawful acts.

In 2012, we reported on waste in construction of facilities used by
U.S. and Afghan troops. Some contracting officers’ representatives
did not have the technical expertise necessary to monitor contract
performance for the contracts they were assigned to oversee. As a
result, some newly constructed buildings had to be repaired or rebuilt
before troops could use them, resulting in wasted resources, low
morale, and risks to personnel safety.

In 2009 we reported on alleged fraud involving Afghan government
and police personnel. U.S. contractors validated the status of almost
47,400 Afghan Ministry of Interior and Afghan National Police

9 GAO, _U.S. Assistance to Mexico: State and USAID Should Strengthen Risk Management_
_for Programs under the Mérida Initiative,_ [GAO-21-335 (Washington, D.C.: Mar. 1, 2021).](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-21-335)

10 GAO, _Afghanistan Reconstruction: GAO Work since 2002 Shows Systematic Internal_
_Control Weaknesses that Increased the Risk of Waste, Fraud, and Abuse_ [, GAO-21-32R](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-21-32R)
(Washington, D.C., Jan. 27, 2021).

#### Lessons from Useful Practices and Weaknesses in Managing Fraud Risk

personnel but were unable to validate the status of almost 29,400
personnel—who were paid in part by $230 million in U.S. contributions
to a UN trust fund—because of a lack of cooperation from some
police commanders. During a 2-month period in 2008, U.S. civilian
police mentors reported a variety of financial irregularities and alleged
fraud.

In 2009 we reported on abuse by the Afghan National Police,
including an Afghan Border Police battalion commander in Khost
province who allegedly sold weapons to anti-coalition forces. In a
March 2008 report, a U.S. contractor working with the Afghan National
Police noted that despite repeated requests, the police chief logistical
officer for Paktika province would not produce a list of serial numbers
for weapons on hand. The contractor suggested that this reluctance to
share information could be part of an attempt to conceal inventory
discrepancies.

Federal law enacted in 2016 required the Office of Management and
Budget (OMB) to establish guidelines for agencies to create controls to
identify and assess fraud risks and to design and implement antifraud
control activities. [11] In its 2016 Circular No. A-123 guidelines, OMB
directed agencies to adhere to leading practices in our _A Framework for_
_Managing Fraud Risk in Federal Programs_ (Fraud Risk Framework). [12]
The Fraud Risk Framework’s comprehensive leading practices, organized
into four components, are designed to help program managers combat
fraud in a strategic, risk-based manner. The four components are (1)
committing to combat fraud by creating an organizational culture, (2)
planning and conducting risk assessments, (3) designing and
implementing a strategy with specific control activities, and (4) evaluating
and adapting fraud risk management activities (see figure 2).

11 Fraud Reduction and Data Analytics Act of 2015, Pub. L. No. 114-186, 130 Stat. 546
(2016). The Fraud Reduction and Data Analytics Act of 2015 was replaced in March 2020
by the Payment Integrity Information Act of 2019. Pub. L. No. 116-117, § 2(a), 134 Stat.
113, 131-132 (2020), codified at 31 U.S.C. § 3357.

12 Office of Management and Budget, _Management’s Responsibility for Enterprise Risk_
_Management and Internal Control_, OMB Circular No. A-123 (Washington, D.C.: July 15,
2016) and GAO, _A Framework for Managing Fraud Risks in Federal Programs_,
[GAO-15-593SP (Washington, D.C.: July 28, 2015).](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-15-593SP)

**Figure 2: The Fraud Risk Management Framework**

Our work has found that agencies have some practices and controls in
place to manage fraud risks in foreign assistance, consistent with GAO’s
Fraud Risk Framework. However, we have also identified systematic
weaknesses in agencies’ efforts to prevent, detect, and properly respond
to fraud risks in foreign assistance and made numerous
recommendations to address these weaknesses. While agencies have
taken some steps to address these weaknesses, the remaining yet to be
implemented recommendations can guide agencies seeking to enhance
their risk management for foreign assistance. Some of these
recommendations are to USAID and USADF, which have respectively
ceased administration of aid and reduced functions; however, the

###### Lessons from Useful Practices and Weakness in Agencies’ Efforts

Internal Controls

practices underlying the recommendations for these agencies may be
applicable to the agencies that will continue to administer foreign
assistance.

Our prior work identified both useful practices and weaknesses in
agencies’ fraud risk management related to (1) internal controls, (2) fraud
risk assessments, (3) fraud awareness training, (4) oversight of
implementing partners, (4) third-party monitoring, (5) use of data analytics
to manage fraud risks, and (6) responding and adapting to risks.

Our prior work has found that agencies have some policies and
procedures to mitigate fraud and other risks. For example, in a 2024
review, we found that USAID maintained internal policies and procedures
that guided award type decisions and outlined roles and responsibilities
for award management. [13] However, agencies’ policies may be insufficient
or not systematically implemented in line with leading practices for
managing fraud risks.

For example, we found in a 2025 review that USADF had inadequate
policies, procedures, and practices to ensure the appropriate use of
federal award funds. [14] As one of many systematic internal control
weaknesses described in our report, we found that USADF had
insufficient internal policies and procedures to guide contract award
decisions and management. Treasury officials that supported USADF’s
contracting process told us that USADF procurement officials engaged in
questionable practices when making awards. USADF’s Director of
Financial Management was later criminally charged by the Department of
Justice. We reported concerns with USADF practices such as steering
contracts to former USADF contractual employees, cancelling
solicitations when desired prior contract employees did not win the
contract, and directing Department of Treasury officials on who to hire
and what to pay their former contractual employees. Treasury officials
noted that these practices all went against Federal Acquisition Regulation
provisions related to procurement integrity. We reported that these
practices could be a sign of potential procurement fraud and abuse
schemes, such as bid rigging and unjustified sole source awards. These
practices may have proliferated because of the lack of procedures and
oversight controls.

13 GAO-24-106192.

14 GAO-25-107574.

Fraud Risk Assessments

Among other things, we recommended that the USADF (1) implement
specific effective internal control policies and processes and (2) ensure
that it has appropriate personnel in place to establish and update internal
control policies, assess and mitigate fraud, ensure appropriate separation
of duties, and manage procurements. Our recommendations are not yet
implemented.

We noted in a 2024 review of assistance provided in conflict zones that
USAID had an Enterprise Risk Management structure that included teams
within bureaus and missions to assess and document risks, including
fraud. [15] Under this structure, USAID bureaus and missions were required
to develop annual risk profiles to identify, analyze, and manage risks and
communicate these risks to leadership, as outlined in USAID’s Enterprise
Risk Management guidance and Anti-Fraud Plan.

While these risk assessments have the potential to be useful tools, we
found weaknesses in USAID’s and State’s approach to assessing fraud
risks for their programs. Specifically, the agencies’ assessments were not
tailored to program-specific fraud risks, in accordance with the leading
practices identified in the Fraud Risk Framework. For example, in 2021,
we found that State and USAID had not fully assessed the potential risks
of fraud in their Mérida programs. [16] In 2024, we again found that USAID’s
fraud risk assessments for El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nigeria,
Somalia, and Ukraine did not examine program-specific fraud risks. [17]
Without completing fraud risk assessments that are tailored to individual
programs, State’s and USAID’s programs were more vulnerable to those
risks.

We made one recommendation to State and seven recommendations to
USAID to assess fraud risks in their programs. Subsequently, State and
USAID completed fraud risk assessments for their Mérida programs, and
USAID created a requirement for regular fraud risk assessments for its
programs agencywide in 2024. As of July 2025, when USAID transferred
its remaining programmatic functions to State, USAID had not
implemented five of these recommendations.

15 GAO-24-106192.

16 GAO-21-335

17 [GAO-24-106192. GAO,](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-24-106192) _Central America: USAID Should Strengthen Staffing and Fraud_
_Risk Management for Initiative Addressing Migration to the U.S.,_ [GAO-24-106232](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-24-106232)
(Washington, D.C.: Mar. 14, 2024).

Fraud Awareness Training

Oversight of Implementing
Partners

Fraud risk training also enables agencies to identify and mitigate these
risks. In a 2024 review, we found that while USAID offered fraud
awareness training, attendance was not always mandated or tracked
because USAID did not require these steps agencywide. [18] We likewise
found in 2021 that State also did not require fraud awareness training. [19]
Without mandatory training, State and USAID lacked assurance that its
staff and partners knew how to identify and mitigate key fraud risks and
vulnerabilities for its programs.

We made three recommendations to State and USAID to update their
policies and guidance to require fraud awareness training. State and
USAID implemented these recommendations.

Agencies employed some useful processes to oversee implementing
partners and their sub-partners throughout the award process that can be
useful for identifying and assessing fraud risks. For example:

**Reviewing past performance.** Our July 2024 review of State’s and
USAID’s use of implementing partners in Ukraine found that State and
USAID had standard processes for considering past performance
when selecting some prime implementing partners for awards (e.g.
contracts or grants), which our review of a sample of 28 awards
indicated that they followed. USAID also routinely monitored its NGO
implementing partners’ screening of their sub-partners for past
performance, as of July 2024. [20]

**Award provisions and due diligence.** Our April 2024 review of
USAID assistance in conflict zones found that prior to implementing
awards, USAID used award provisions (i.e. contractual or legal terms
in the award) to outline control requirements related to fiduciary risks,
including provisions on fraud disclosure, whistleblower protections,
and conflicts of interest. [21] Likewise, USAID had policies to conduct
due diligence and partner vetting and included provisions in awards to
ensure assistance did not benefit terrorists or sanctioned entities. [22]

18 GAO-24-106192. GAO-24-106232.

19 GAO-21-335

20 GAO, _Ukraine: State and USAID Should Improve Processes for Ensuring Partners Can_
_Perform Required Work,_ [GAO-24-106751 (Washington, D.C.: Jul. 31, 2024).](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-24-106751)

21 GAO-24-106192.

22 GAO-24-106192.

- **Improving internal controls.** We found USAID had several
strategies to oversee implementing partners’ internal controls and
address any deficiencies. For example, as of April 2024, USAID’s
missions in Nigeria and Ukraine conducted financial reviews of
awards to oversee and detect fiduciary risks, including fraud. For
example, a financial review might look at a partner’s accounting and
record keeping; internal control procedures; or compliance with the
award agreement. The Nigeria mission also required certain local
partners to hire a compliance officer to help build an internal
compliance system, as local partners may not have had the same
level of capacity and controls as international implementing partners.

Our work has also found weaknesses in State’s and USAID’s oversight of
implementing partners and their sub-partners that increased
vulnerabilities to financial risks, such as fraud, and the risk of providing
assistance to entities or individuals associated with terrorism. In general,
we noted additional weaknesses with State and USAID’s oversight of
awards with international organizations compared to nongovernmental
organizations. Specifically,

- **Past performance of international organizations.** We found
weaknesses with State’s review of potential partners’ past
performance during our 2024 review of State and USAID’s oversight
of partners in Ukraine. [23] Specifically, State did not screen for past
performance for letters of agreement, a type of award with certain
international organizations, as its policy did not require this screening.
Without screening all types of implementing partners, State had a
higher risk of selecting implementing partners that may have been
excluded from federal awards or may not have performed well. In
addition, across all award types, State did not document detailed
information about applicants’ past performance because its policies
did not require it. Detailed documentation would help other State
officials understand the risks of using these partners to implement
assistance under current and potential future awards.

- **Past performance of sub-partners.** We also found weaknesses with
how State and USAID monitored their partners’ screening of their subpartners for past performance, based on the sample of awards we
reviewed. While USAID routinely monitored how its NGO
implementing partners screened sub-partners for past performance, it
did not monitor its international organization partners, such as United
Nations agencies. State did not perform this monitoring for either type

23 GAO-24-106751

Third-Party Monitoring

of partner. Without periodic monitoring, the agencies increased the
risk that partners may not have effectively screened sub-partners.

- **Sub-partner vetting and provisions.** A March 2021 review of USAID
funding to the West Bank and Gaza found that, for fiscal years 2015
through 2019, USAID fully complied with requirements for partner
vetting, antiterrorism certificates, and mandatory provisions. [24]
However, our analysis of a sample of subawards showed that
partners were not consistently vetting subawardees and certain
mandatory anti-terrorism provisions were not included in contracts, as
required. Weaknesses in USAID’s subaward monitoring may have
increased the risk of providing assistance to entities or individuals
associated with terrorism.

In these reports, we made seven recommendations to State and USAID
to ensure proper screening of partners and sub-partners. State and
USAID implemented six of these recommendations by establishing
requirements for officials to document past performance information and
periodically monitor partners’ screening on sub-partners, among other
things. One recommendation to State is yet to be implemented and
relates to screening international organizations.

Conducting in-person site visits for assistance programs is an important
oversight tool. However, the presence of conflict limits agencies’ direct
oversight of their partners. In these environments, agencies can use thirdparty monitoring to manage this limitation. Specifically, our 2016 review of
USAID’s humanitarian assistance to Syria and our 2024 review of
USAID’s assistance in conflict zones found that USAID used third-party
monitors to improve oversight and verify progress of its programs. [25]

However, this third-party monitoring focused on performance
management and was not designed explicitly for fraud risk detection. As a
result, there were inconsistencies in whether these monitors checked for
indications of potential fraud. For example, we reviewed site visit
questionnaires for the third-party monitoring contracts in Nigeria, Somalia,
and Ukraine and found examples of questions that could be used to
detect possible instances of fraud and other risks. Some questionnaires

24 GAO, _West Bank and Gaza Aid: Should Funding Resume, Increased Oversight of_
_Subawardee Compliance with USAID’s Antiterrorism Policies and Procedures May_
_Reduce Risks,_ [GAO-21-332 (Washington, D.C.: Mar. 29, 2021).](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-21-332)

25 GAO, _Syria Humanitarian Assistance: Some Risks of Providing Aid Inside Syria_
_Assessed, but U.S. Agencies Could Improve Fraud Oversight,_ [GAO-16-629 (Washington,](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-16-629)
[D.C.: Jul. 14, 2016). GAO-24-106192.](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-24-106192)

Data Analytics

asked beneficiaries whether anyone had demanded payment for
assistance, and others had questions on practices to manage fiduciary
risk, such as how partners select beneficiaries and whether they
maintained distribution registers. However, we did not see similar
practices consistently across countries. Improved training and guidance
for third-party monitoring would allow these monitors to be used to help
assess and identify potential risks.

We made three recommendations to USAID to enhance the use of thirdparty monitoring to detect potential fraud. One recommendation related to
USAID’s programs in Syria is implemented, as USAID revised site visit
templates for third-party monitors to indicate potential fraud incidents
during site visits. As of July 2025, USAID had not implemented two
recommendations related to updating agencywide guidance on using
third-party monitoring for potential fraud detection.

Data analytics can help agencies prevent and detect potential fraud. For
example, our 2024 review of USAID assistance in conflict zones
described how USAID’s Bureau for Humanitarian Affairs maintained a
central tracker of all reported allegations, including fraud, across all its
awards. [26] The bureau used this information to identify trends and support
staff in overseeing awards.

We also noted weaknesses in the use of data analytics for fraud risk
management. In September 2025, we found that USAID did not regularly
verify or use all available data to inform its oversight of direct budget
support to Ukraine. [27] Specifically, USAID did not review Ukraine’s
detailed expenditure data received from the World Bank. We analyzed a
subset of this data and identified 161 unusual increases out of 5,121
expenditure changes. For example, one large increase was a 2,474
percent increase (equal to $1,067,542) between April and June 2023 for
salaries to non-security government employees working at the Ukraine
Supreme Court. Although non-security government employees typically
receive bonuses in June, this percentage increase was an outlier for June
2023 and merited further examination. Reviewing all available
expenditure data would help identify data anomalies, determine the

26 GAO-24-106192.

27 GAO, _Ukraine: State Should Build on USAID’s Oversight of Direct Budget Support,_
[GAO-25-107057 (Washington, D.C.: Sep. 24, 2025).](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-25-107057)

Responding and Adapting to
Risks

cause, and help ensure Ukraine’s use of U.S. direct budget support
funding was appropriate.

We made one recommendation to State, which assumed oversight
responsibility for the direct budget support to Ukraine from USAID in July
2025, to review expenditure data to enhance oversight of direct budget
support funding. This recommendation is yet to be implemented.

Beyond preventing and detecting risks, agencies must also effectively
respond and adapt to them. Response can include investigating potential
fraud and taking corrective actions. For example, during our 2024 review
of assistance in conflict zones we found that USAID required its awardees
to report all violations of criminal law involving fraud or other certain
prohibited conduct potentially affecting the award to the USAID OIG. We
found multiple instances when implementing partners in Ukraine reported
instances of conflicts of interest to the OIG for investigation. Our review
also found that after a Somalia mission partner reported and confirmed
instances of fraudulent invoices, the mission requested that the partner
revise its plan for conducting due diligence to address related internal
control gaps.

We found that, at times, agencies could improve actions to address fraud
and other risks in federal contracts, grants, or other awards. For example,
in a 2021 review, we noted that USAID’s compliance review process
found numerous instances of partners not complying with requirements
for vetting and inclusion of mandatory anti-terrorism provisions in
subawards for the West Bank Gaza program. [28] However, we found this
compliance review process did not always occur in time to enforce
remedies for awardee’s noncompliance before awards ended, such as
withholding cash payments pending correction of the deficiency or
withholding approval of further awards. We recommended USAID
conduct compliance reviews and take appropriate actions before awards
end, which USAID implemented.

Even if entities take corrective actions or remedy the harm caused by
fraud or other violations, it is essential for agencies to have strong
controls to prevent and detect future violations. In particular, reporting
award violations and other information related to contractor performance
in federal systems used to inform contracting decisions is also essential.
However, we have found that contracting officials sometimes failed to

28 GAO-21-332.

###### Recommendations to Better Manage Fraud Risks

Recommendations to agencies

report contractor violations, such as human trafficking violations in federal
contracts or terminations of contracts due to the fault of the contractor, in
required federal procurement databases. Because other contracting
officials rely on these databases to review contractors’ performance
histories before making new awards, incomplete reporting increases the
risk that agencies will unknowingly work with contractors with a history of
violating award provisions, thereby putting taxpayer dollars at risk. We are
particularly concerned about this incomplete reporting because we are
aware of instances when agencies have continued to work with
implementing partners or sub-partners on other ongoing or new awards
after those partners have entered into settlement agreements with the
Department of Justice for fraud or related violations. We recommended
that agencies improve their reporting of violations. For example, we made
one recommendation to the Secretary of the Army to clarify guidance
regarding reporting requirements for human trafficking violations, which it
implemented. We also made a recommendation to the Department of
Defense on reporting information such as contract terminations in these
databases, which is not yet implemented.

Agencies should also continually adapt their risk management activities
by applying lessons learned. However, USAID could not show us how
they have used such lessons to develop better prevention and detection
controls—a leading practice in fraud risk management. For example,
while USAID mission staff in Nigeria, Somalia, and Ukraine reported
some sharing of risk related lessons, we found that USAID lacks a
dedicated mechanism for its missions to systematically share lessons
learned about managing risk in conflict zones. In response, we made a
recommendation to USAID to develop a mechanism for systematically
sharing lessons learned among conflict-affected missions related to the
management of risks that are common across conflict zones, including
fraud. As of July 2025, USAID had not implemented this
recommendation.

Over the last ten years, we have made dozens of recommendations to
agencies on how they can better manage fraud and other risks in their
foreign assistance programs, including those cited above. We have also
identified actions Congress can take to improve agencies’ efforts.

From July 2016 through September 2025, we made at least 51
recommendations to improve and support the management of fraud and
other risks for agencies delivering foreign assistance. These included 14
recommendations to State, 25 recommendations to USAID, four
recommendations to USADF, and eight recommendations to other

Matters for Congressional
Consideration

agencies and offices including Treasury, the Department of Energy, and
the Office of Management and Budget.

As of February 2026, these agencies collectively had taken actions to
fully implement 22 of these recommendations but had yet to fully
implement the remaining 29. Specifically, State had eight implemented
recommendations and six not yet implemented; USAID had 13
implemented recommendations and 12 not implemented; USADF had
four recommendations not yet implemented; and the remaining agencies
had one implemented recommendation and seven not yet implemented. [29]

With the cessation of USAID’s administration of aid and reduction of
USADF’s functions, the practices underlying the recommendations for
these agencies may be applicable to State and other agencies that will
continue to administer foreign assistance.

Congressional action is also part of the solution, and we have identified
actions that Congress could take to help agencies combat fraud. [30] For
example:

**Reinstating the requirement for agencies to report on their**
**antifraud controls and fraud risk management efforts in agency**
**financial reports.** In March 2022, GAO recommended that Congress
amend the Payment Integrity Information Act of 2019 to reinstate
certain reporting requirements. [31] Requiring agencies to report
annually on their antifraud controls and fraud risk management efforts
would support congressional oversight and focus agency attention on
strategic fraud risk management and help align their efforts with
leading practices.

In conclusion, combating fraud requires continuous learning, oversight,
and improvement. Addressing the weaknesses we have identified and
implementing related recommendations and matters will help the federal
government to manage fraud risks in foreign assistance. Moreover, as

29 We follow up on recommendations we have made and update the status at least once
per year. Experience has shown that it takes time for some recommendations to be
implemented.

30 GAO, _Fraud Risk Management: Key Areas for Federal Agency and Congressional_
_Action,_ [GAO-23-106567 (Washington D.C.: Apr. 13, 2023).](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-23-106567)

31 GAO, Emergency Relief Funds: Significant Improvements Are Needed to Ensure
[Transparency and Accountability for COVID-19 and Beyond, GAO-22-105715](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-22-105715)
(Washington, D.C.: Mar. 17, 2022).

#### GAO Contact and Staff Acknowledgements Related GAO Products

agencies adapt and undertake new programs and challenges, GAO’s
fraud risk management resources, in addition to the OIGs’ and our
findings and recommendations, can guide agencies’ continued growth in
fraud management. [32] In particular, to help State transition into its new role
as the lead U.S. foreign assistance provider, it can look to incorporate the
useful practices into current and future assistance programs and avoid
the weaknesses our work has identified.

Chairman Mills, Ranking Member Moskowitz, and Members of the
Subcommittee, this completes my prepared statement. I would be
pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time.

If you or your staff have any questions about this testimony, please
contact Latesha Love-Grayer, Director, International Affairs and Trade, at
[lovegrayerl@gao.gov. Contact points for our Office of Congressional](mailto:lovegrayerl@gao.gov)
Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this
statement. GAO staff who made key contributions to this testimony are
Heather Latta (Assistant Director), Michael Maslowski (Analyst-inCharge), Rianna Jansen, Terry Richardson, Larissa Barrett, Samantha
Jorgensen, Rebecca Shea, and Seto Bagdoyan. Staff who made key
contributions to the reports cited in the testimony are identified in the
source products.

_Combating Fraud: Approaches to Evaluate Effectiveness and_
_Demonstrate Integrity._ [GAO-26-107609. (Washington D.C.: January 14,](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-26-107609)
2026).

_Ukraine: State Should Build on USAID’s Oversight of Direct Budget_
_Support._ GAO-25-107057. (Washington, D.C.: September 24, 2025).

_U.S. African Development Foundation: Strategic Approach Needed to_
_Mitigate Fraud Risks._ [GAO-25-107574. (Washington, D.C.: September](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-25-107574)
15, 2025).

32 For example, USAID OIG published several reports with lessons for the future of foreign
assistance. U.S. Agency for International Development, Office of Inspector General,
_Humanitarian Assistance: Lessons for the Future_ (Washington, D.C.: Jul 16, 2025). U.S.
Agency for International Development, Office of Inspector General, _Public International_
_Organizations: Lessons for the Future_ (Washington, D.C.: Jul 23, 2025). U.S. Agency for
International Development, Office of Inspector General, _Global Health: Lessons for the_
_Future_ (Washington, D.C.: Jul 30, 2025).

_Ukraine: DOE Could Better Assess Fraud Risks and Formalize Its_
_Transition Plans for Nuclear Security and Safety Efforts._ [GAO-25-108444.](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-25-108444)
(Washington, D.C.: June 12, 2025).

_Fraud in Federal Programs: FinCEN Should Take Steps to Improve the_
_Ability of Inspectors General to Determine Beneficial Owners of_
_Companies._ [GAO-25-107143. (Washington, D.C.: April 8, 2025).](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-25-107143)

_Federal Contractors: Actions Needed to Improve Quality of Performance_
_and Integrity Data._ [GAO-24-106911. (Washington, D.C.: September 25,](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-24-106911)
2024).

_Ukraine: State and USAID Should Improve Processes for Ensuring_
_Partners Can Perform Required Work._ [GAO-24-106751. (Washington,](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-24-106751)
D.C.: July 31, 2024).

_Human Trafficking: Agencies Need to Adopt a Systematic Approach to_
_Manage Risks in Contracts._ [GAO-24-106973. (Washington, D.C.: July 30,](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-24-106973)
2024).

_Foreign Assistance: USAID Should Strengthen Risk Management in_
_Conflict Zones._ [GAO-24-106192. (Washington, D.C.: April 30, 2024).](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-24-106192)

_Fraud Risk Management: 2018-2022 Data Show Federal Government_
_Loses an Estimated $233 Billion to $521 Billion Annually to Fraud, Based_
_on Various Risk Environments._ [GAO-24-105833. (Washington, D.C.: April](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-24-105833)
16, 2024).

_Central America: USAID Should Strengthen Staffing and Fraud Risk_
_Management for Initiative Addressing Migration to the U.S._
[GAO-24-106232. (Washington, D.C.: March 14, 2024).](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-24-106232)

_Fraud Risk Management: Key Areas for Federal Agency and_
_Congressional Action._ [GAO-23-106567. (Washington D.C.: April 13,](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-23-106567)
2023).

_Emergency Relief Funds: Significant Improvements Are Needed to_
_Ensure Transparency and Accountability for COVID-19 and Beyond._
[GAO-22-105715. (Washington, D.C.: March 17, 2022).](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-22-105715)

_West Bank and Gaza Aid: Should Funding Resume, Increased Oversight_
_of Subawardee Compliance with USAID’s Antiterrorism Policies May_
_Reduce Risks._ [GAO-21-332. (Washington, D.C.: March 29, 2021).](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-21-332)

_Human Trafficking: DOD Should Address Weaknesses in Oversight of_
_Contractors and Reporting of Investigations Related to Contracts._
GAO-21-546. (Washington, D.C.: August 4, 2021).

_Afghanistan Reconstruction: GAO Work since 2002 Shows Systemic_
_Internal Control Weaknesses that Increased the Risk of Waste, Fraud,_
_and Abuse._ [GAO-21-32R. (Washington, D.C.: January 27, 2021).](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-21-32R)

_U.S. Assistance To Mexico: State and USAID Should Strengthen Risk_
_Management for Programs under the Mérida Initiative._ [GAO-21-335.](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-21-335)
(Washington, D.C.: March 1, 2021).

_Syrian Refugees: U.S. Agencies Conduct Financial Oversight Activities_
_for Humanitarian Assistance but Should Strengthen Monitoring._
GAO-18-58. (Washington, D.C.: October 31, 2017).

_Syria Humanitarian Assistance: Some Risks of Providing Aid inside Syria_
_Assessed, but U.S. Agencies Could Improve Fraud Oversight._
[GAO-16-629. (Washington, D.C.: July 14, 2016).](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-16-629)

_Syria Humanitarian Assistance: Implementing Partners Have Assessed_
_Some Risks of Providing Aid inside Syria, but U.S. Agencies Could_
_Improve Fraud Oversight._ [GAO-16-808T. (Washington, D.C.: July 14,](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-16-808T)
2016).

_A Framework for Managing Fraud Risks in Federal Programs_ .
[GAO-15-593SP. (Washington, D.C.: July 28, 2015).](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-15-593SP)

This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the
United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety
without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain
copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be
necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately.

##### GAO’s Mission Obtaining Copies of GAO Reports and Testimony

###### Order by Phone

##### Connect with GAO To Report Fraud, Waste, and Abuse in Federal Programs Media Relations Congressional Relations General Inquiries

The Government Accountability Office, the audit, evaluation, and investigative
arm of Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting its constitutional
responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the
federal government for the American people. GAO examines the use of public
funds; evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides analyses,
recommendations, and other assistance to help Congress make informed
oversight, policy, and funding decisions. GAO’s commitment to good government
is reflected in its core values of accountability, integrity, and reliability.

The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is
[through our website. Each weekday afternoon, GAO posts on its website newly](https://www.gao.gov/)
[released reports, testimony, and correspondence. You can also subscribe to](https://www.gao.gov/subscribe/index.php)
GAO’s email updates to receive notification of newly posted products.

The price of each GAO publication reflects GAO’s actual cost of production and
distribution and depends on the number of pages in the publication and whether
the publication is printed in color or black and white. Pricing and ordering
[information is posted on GAO’s website, https://www.gao.gov/ordering.htm.](https://www.gao.gov/ordering.htm)

Place orders by calling (202) 512-6000, toll free (866) 801-7077, or
TDD (202) 512-2537.

Orders may be paid for using American Express, Discover Card, MasterCard,
Visa, check, or money order. Call for additional information.

[Connect with GAO on X, LinkedIn, Instagram, and YouTube.](https://x.com/usgao)
[Subscribe to our Email Updates. Listen to our Podcasts.](https://www.gao.gov/about/contact-us/stay-connected)
Visit GAO on the web at https://www.gao.gov.

Contact FraudNet:

Website: [https://www.gao.gov/about/what-gao-does/fraudnet](https://www.gao.gov/about/what-gao-does/fraudnet)

Automated answering system: (800) 424-5454

Sarah Kaczmarek, Managing Director, Media@gao.gov

David A. Powner, Acting Managing Director, CongRel@gao.gov

[https://www.gao.gov/about/contact-us](https://www.gao.gov/about/contact-us)

Please Print on Recycled Paper.