# Health Care Workforce: Federal Grants Supporting Mental Health

**Report:** GAO-26-107951 | **Published:** 2026-03-12 | **Source:** [U.S. Government Accountability Office](https://www.gao.gov/products/gao-26-107951)

---

**Why This Matters**

**Key Takeaways**

There are over 17 million health professionals in the U.S. who serve in a variety
of clinical and non-clinical roles, according to the Department of Health and
Human Services (HHS). These health professionals often work in demanding
and stressful environments, which can affect their well-being and mental health.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reported in May 2022
that the COVID-19 pandemic led to new and worsening mental health conditions
for many health professionals, including depression and anxiety. Mental health
conditions can adversely affect the delivery of health care and thus patient
safety, according to the National Academy of Sciences, Engineering, and
Medicine.

In 2022, the Dr. Lorna Breen Health Care Provider Protection Act (Breen Act)
authorized grants to hospital systems, health professions’ schools, and other
entities to address mental health conditions, including substance use disorders.
From calendar years 2022 through 2024, HHS awarded COVID-19 relief funding
to three grant programs that supported a range of activities designed to promote
mental health and resiliency—the ability to positively adapt and endure in
stressful situations—among certain health professionals.

The Breen Act includes a provision for us to review these grant programs. This
report describes available information, as of February 2025, on the prevalence
and severity of mental health conditions, including substance use disorders,
among health professionals; the grant programs; and HHS’s oversight of these
grant programs.

- The prevalence of mental health conditions, such as anxiety and substance
use disorders, varies across health professionals, according to literature we
reviewed. While we found studies that were generalizable across health
professions, these studies did not include data on the severity of these
conditions among health professionals. Some studies that were conducted
during the COVID-19 pandemic noted that mental health conditions among
health professionals were exacerbated during this time period.

- Common factors negatively affecting mental health among health
professionals include stressful work environments, lack of inclusion in
decision-making (i.e., workers not participating in decision-making), and
stigma around mental health, according to HHS and other government
reports, a grantee study, and representatives of stakeholder organizations we
interviewed.

- HHS officials identified three grant programs focused on addressing mental
health that specifically targeted health professionals, which includes providers
and students. These grant programs, which ended in December 2024,
provided $103.2 million in funding to 45 grant awardees (or grantees), from

Page 1 GAO-26-107951 Health Professionals’ Mental Health

**Who makes up the**
**health professional**
**workforce?**

**What does available**

**literature show about**
**the prevalence and**
**severity of mental**
**health conditions**
**among health**
**professionals?**

calendar years 2022 through 2024 for activities such as providing mental
health screening and services. Grantees included organizations such as
hospital systems and universities and trained up to approximately 135,000
participants a year.

- Some grantees reported a variety of benefits of the grant programs, including
higher job retention and reduced depression and anxiety of participants as
compared to non-participants. They also cited challenges related to
resources, organizational commitment to well-being, and stigma.

The health professional workforce includes people working in both clinical and
non-clinical professions. Clinical health professionals include physicians and
nurses as well as behavioral health, oral health, public health, and allied health
professionals, such as physical therapists, and paraprofessionals, such as
community health workers. Non-clinical health professionals include health care
support personnel such as administrative, facilities, and operations and
maintenance staff. (See fig. 1).

**Figure 1: Types of Health Professionals Included in the Health Professional Workforce**

We found there is a range in the prevalence of mental health conditions among
health professionals that varies by profession, according to literature we
reviewed. Commonly studied mental health conditions among health
professionals include depression, anxiety, substance use disorders, and the
related topic of suicide. [1 ] These conditions can also occur together. We found
studies that included prevalence data that were generalizable to all health care
professionals. We also found non-generalizable studies with prevalence data that
were specific to a particular subset of health care professionals, such as nurses.
Some of these studies were conducted during the COVID-19 pandemic and
noted that mental health conditions were exacerbated during this time period.

- **Depression and anxiety.** An estimated 34 percent of health care workers,
including physicians and nurses, reported experiencing symptoms of
depression and 57 percent reported experiencing symptoms of anxiety in
2022, according to a CDC analysis of nationally representative generalizable
data of health workers. [2]

Page 2 GAO-26-107951 Health Professionals’ Mental Health

               - **Substance use disorders.** Seven percent of nurse respondents reported
substance use disorder, according to a non-generalizable, online survey and
mailed questionnaire administered to nurses from 2020 through 2021. [3] We
found no generalizable studies on substance use disorders among health
professionals in our literature review.

               - **Suicide** . The incidence rate of suicide among female nurses was between 21
percent and 41 percent higher than the general female population from 2018
through 2021, according to a study using generalizable mortality data from 30
states and the District of Columbia. The rate among male nurses was
comparable to that of the general male population. [4]

Literature we reviewed did not identify generalizable data on the severity of these
conditions among health professionals, such as the degree to which a mental
health condition affects an individual’s functioning and well-being for the health
professional workforce.

Additionally, we also reviewed literature on the prevalence of burnout. Burnout is
a common expression of mental health among health professionals, according to
HHS. It includes emotional exhaustion, depersonalization (e.g., detachment from
patients), and feelings of ineffectiveness. (See fig. 2.)

               - An estimated 46 percent of health care workers reported experiencing
burnout often or very often in 2022 during the COVID-19 pandemic, up from
an estimated 32 percent in 2018, according to a CDC analysis of nationally
representative data on health workers. [5]

               - Twenty-nine percent of physicians, 35 percent of physician assistants, and 37
percent of nurse practitioners who responded reported burnout in 2024,
according to a non-generalizable industry survey of health professionals. [6]

**Figure 2: Estimated Prevalence of Depression, Anxiety, and Burnout Among Health Professionals, 2022**

Notes: The margins of error at the 95 percent confidence level were less than 5 percentage points. See Jeannie
A. Nigam, R. Michael Barker, Thomas R. Cunningham, et al., "Vital Signs: Health Worker—Perceived Working
Conditions and Symptoms of Poor Mental Health—Quality of Worklife Survey, United States, 2018–2022.”
_Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report_, vol. 72, no. 44 (2023): 1197–1205.

See appendix 1 for a complete list of studies we reviewed.

Page 3 GAO-26-107951 Health Professionals’ Mental Health

**What factors negatively**
**affect mental health**
**among health**
**professionals?**

Common factors negatively affecting mental health among health professionals
include stressful work environments, lack of inclusion in decision-making, and
stigma around mental health, according to HHS and other government reports, a
grantee study, and interviews with representatives of stakeholder organizations.

**Stressful work environments** . Stressors specific to the organizational work
environment of health care settings include high workloads, long work hours,
inadequate staffing levels, administrative burden, and harassment from patients,
coworkers, and others in the workplace. This is according to HHS and other
government reports, a grantee study, and representatives we interviewed from
four stakeholder organizations.

Additionally, the COVID-19 pandemic exacerbated stressful work environments
for health professionals. For example, it resulted in an increase in the incidence
of depression and anxiety for this group, according to a 2022 U.S. Surgeon
General’s report.

**Lack of inclusion in decision-making.** There were a range of societal factors,
such as a lack inclusion in decision-making in the workplace, that could
adversely affect the mental health of health professionals, according to HHS and
other government reports and a grantee study. For example, having limited voice
and autonomy at work may be associated with worker burnout, according to a
2022 U.S. Surgeon General’s report. Similarly, a CDC analysis of nationally
representative data on health workers found that health workers who were able
to participate in workplace decisions and who trusted management were less
likely to feel depressed. [7]

**Stigma around mental health.** Stigma can be a factor in health professionals
not seeking mental health care, according to HHS and other government reports
and representatives of three of the four stakeholder organizations we
interviewed. For example, health professionals may be fearful of a breach of their
privacy and negative implications for their credentialing and licensing.
Stigmatizing questions on hospital credentialing applications often led to health
professionals not seeking care for mental health, according to a CDC report on
health professional well-being that cited survey results from studies conducted by
health professional associations. [8] Such questions include those regarding the
applicant’s history of mental health conditions, as well as explanations for time off
from practice, according to representatives from one of our stakeholder
organizations. [9]

See figure 3 for common factors identified that may negatively affect health
professionals’ mental health.

**Figure 3: Common Factors That May Negatively Affect Mental Health Among Health Professionals**

Page 4 GAO-26-107951 Health Professionals’ Mental Health

**What HHS grant**
**programs have**
**addressed mental**
**health among health**
**professionals?**

HHS officials identified three grant programs targeting health professional mental
health. [10] These grant programs provided COVID-19 relief funding to 45 grantees,
awarding $103.2 million from calendar years 2022 through 2024. Funded by the
American Rescue Plan Act of 2021, the grant programs ended in December
2024; however, some of the grantees received a no cost extension to finish out
their program activities by December 31, 2025. [11]

Two grant programs awarded funding to 44 grantees. These grantees included
organizations such as universities, hospital systems, community health centers,
research institutions, and private foundations. One of the grant programs
supported health professions students while the other grant program supported
health care providers. The third grant program awarded funding to the Technical
Assistance Center (TAC) grantee to provide technical assistance to the other 44
grantees to build capacity and provide resources for implementing activities
supported with the grant funding.

The three HHS grant programs generally aimed to promote evidence-based and
evidence-informed mental health strategies to reduce and address burnout,
mental health, and substance use disorders, and to build resilience among health
professionals. The overall aim of each of the two grant programs supporting
providers and students was similar, but the specific purpose, goals, and target
beneficiaries of each grant program differed. For example, the grant program
supporting providers focused on promoting mental health and resiliency at the
organizational level, such as across a hospital system. The grant program
supporting students focused on training activities to support the mental health
and resiliency of students and other health professionals in rural and
underserved communities. See table 1 for more information on the three grant

programs.

**Table 1: Characteristics of HHS Grant Programs Focused on Addressing Health Professional Mental**
**Health, January 2022 Through December 2024**

**Award amount**

**(number of**

**Grant program** **Purpose** **Goals**

**Grant program** **Purpose** **Goals** **beneficiaries** **grantees)**

Promoting Supported adopting Improve Health care $30.1 million
Resilience and and expanding organizational providers and (10 grantees)
Mental Health programs to culture to build workforce
Among Health promote mental health professional
Professional health and resiliency resiliency
Workforce

Supported adopting
and expanding
programs to
promote mental
health and resiliency

Improve
organizational
culture to build
health professional
resiliency

**Target**
**beneficiaries**

Health care
providers and
workforce

$30.1 million
(10 grantees)

Address mental
health and promote
resiliency of health
professionals

Create a network to
exchange best
practices, build
grantee capacity
and provide
resources to

address mental

health

Health and Public
Safety Workforce
Resilience Training
Program

Health and Public
Safety Workforce
Resiliency Technical
Assistance Center

Supported training
activities to address

mental health

conditions and
promote resiliency

Provided technical

assistance to the
grantees from grant
programs listed
above

Health care students

and workforce

44 grantees from
programs listed
above

$67.1 million
(34 grantees)

$5.9 million

(1 grantee)

Source: GAO analysis of Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Notice of Funding Opportunities and Grant Award Data. | GAO-26107951

Note: Summary award amount data is from the HHS Tracking Accountability in Government Grants System, a
database of grants awarded by HHS. The health care workforce may include people working in both clinical
professions (e.g., physicians and nurses) and non-clinical professions (e.g., health care support personnel).

Page 5 GAO-26-107951 Health Professionals’ Mental Health

**What activities did HHS**
**grantees conduct to**
**address mental health**
**among health**
**professionals?**

The 44 grantees of the two grant programs supporting providers and students
reported conducting a variety of activities to support mental health and measure
outcomes, according to analyses by the TAC grantee, HHS data, and interviews
with selected grantees. [12] Examples of these activities included the following:

**Providing mental health screening and services to individuals** . Most of the
44 grantees provided a variety of mental health screening and services to
participants of grantee activities, according to a TAC analysis of grantee
activities. [13] For example, 38 grantees instituted wellness initiatives (such as
physical fitness tools and tobacco cessation support), 31 grantees provided peer
and crisis support, and 24 grantees offered mental health screening and
services, according to an interim analysis by the TAC grantee. Two of the 44
grantees used funding to provide support for substance use treatment and
prevention training, according to representatives of the TAC grantee.

**Training individuals on wellness and resilience** . The 44 grantees also
provided training on a variety of topics, such as wellness and resilience, to health
professionals, including the following.

- Providing over 1,300 training courses to health professionals from January
2022 through June 2024, according to HHS data.

- Continuing education training to front-line health care workers and staff,
managers and mid-level supervisors, and senior managers and executive
leadership, according to HHS data.

See table 2 for more information on the trainings.

**Table 2. Characteristics of Trainings Provided Through Two Mental Health Grant Programs, January**
**2022 Through June 2024**

**Profession of**

**Grant program** **Reporting period** **participants (top 3)** **Number of participants**

Promoting Resilience and January 2022-June 2022 [a] Other [b] 37,945
Mental Health Among Nursing
Health Professional Medicine
Workforce Other [b]

**Grant program** **Reporting period**

January 2022-June 2022 [a]

Other [b]
Nursing
Medicine

37,945

July 2022- June 2023

Other [b]
Nursing
Behavioral health

55,738

July 2023 - June 2024 [c] Other [b]
Nursing
Medicine

Health and Public Safety
Workforce Resilience
Training Program

January 2022 -June
2022 [a]

July 2022 - June 2023

Other [b]

Behavioral health

Medicine

Other [b]

Medicine
Nursing

July 2023 – June 2024 [c] Other [b]
Medicine
Nursing

Source: GAO analysis of Health Resources & Services Administration Data Dashboard data. | GAO-26-107951

69,997

14,782

45,530

65,397

Note: Summary data are from the Health Resources & Services Administration’s data.HRSA.gov dashboard for
January 2022 through June 2024. The third grant program did not provide services or training and instead
provided support to the 44 grantees. As such, the third grant program is not included in this table.

a While the Data Dashboard data are presented by academic year (e.g., July 2021 through June 2022), the July
2021 through June 2022 data for this Health Resources & Services Administration grant program started in
January 2022, which was the beginning of the grant’s performance period.

b The profession options provided by Health Resources & Services Administration included behavioral health,
dentistry, medicine, nursing, public health, and student, and other. The “other” profession category included
nutrition, pharmacy, and physical therapy, among others.

c Our analysis does not include data reported in the final 6 months of the grant program (July 2024 through
December 2024), as data for that time period were not available at the time of our review.

Page 6 GAO-26-107951 Health Professionals’ Mental Health

**How did HHS**
**oversee grant**

**programs**
**addressing mental**
**health among**
**health**
**professionals?**

**Measuring effects of funded activities** . HHS required the 44 grantees to
measure the effects of their interventions at their organizations, such as retention
rates. In addition, some grantees measured educational outcomes of trainings,
use of resources and mental health services, work and learning environment
changes, and worker and trainee outcomes, according to a TAC analysis. [14]
Some grantees also planned to assess organization-level outcomes (e.g.,
absenteeism, work productivity, cost savings).

**Strengthening organizational support for well-being** . Twenty-four grantees
conducted activities to strengthen organizational support for well-being, such as
reviewing policies for their organizations to determine if they might negatively
affect staff well-being, according to a TAC analysis. [15] One grantee we
interviewed told us they developed a “Code Lavender” program in their hospital.
This program initiated a series of actions the hospital was to take in response to
a traumatic event, such as proactively providing support to affected health
workers.

HHS reviewed annual reports submitted by grantees, conducted regular
meetings with grantees, and oversaw an external evaluation of the grants,
among other activities, to oversee the grant programs over the 3-year period of
January 2022 through December 2024. These activities were designed to
oversee the progress and performance of grantees in meeting their goals and
objectives.

**Reviewed annual grantee reports**

One of HHS’s primary mechanisms for overseeing grant programs was reviewing
annual reports submitted by grantees for the three grant programs during
calendar years 2022 through 2024. According to HHS officials, the purpose of
monitoring the data contained in the annual reports was to: 1) ensure grantees
were compliant with grant and statutory requirements, 2) enhance overall
program performance, 3) respond to any inquiries about program progress, and
4) ensure individual grantees were meeting their individual goals and objectives.
(See fig. 4 for more information on components reported in annual grantee
reports).

- **Annual non-competing continuation reports.** These reports included
qualitative information to assess the progress of grants. [16] For example,
grantees provided information on each project’s current staffing, changes to
operations, planned activities and progress during the remaining period, and
plans for the next year of the award, including expected participants to be
served or trained. These reports also included quantitative information, such
as the number of participants expected to be trained.

- **Annual performance reports.** These reports included data to enable HHS to
measure the effects of grantee programs, according to HHS officials. [17] For
example, HHS required grantees to report on the number of individuals
employed by the grantee’s organization and the number of individuals who
participated in training. Grantees were also required to report retention data
by those who participated and those who did not participate in grantee
activities.

Page 7 GAO-26-107951 Health Professionals’ Mental Health

**What challenges**
**did grantees**
**report in**
**implementing HHS**
**grant programs?**

**Figure 4: Selected Components Grantees Reported to the Department of Health and Human Services,**
**2022 through 2024**

Note: HHS required grantees of all three grant programs to submit annual non-competing continuation reports
and the 44 grantees of the two grant programs supporting providers and students to submit annual performance
reports. HHS did not require the Technical Assistance Center grantee to submit annual performance reports,
because this grantee did not support individual providers and students.

**Held regular meetings with grantees**

HHS officials said grant program officers met one-on-one with grantees on a bimonthly or quarterly basis to receive updates and answer questions over the 3year grant period. According to HHS officials, HHS provided grantees with a
communications template to facilitate these meetings, which included discussion
topics such as a review of grant progress and challenges. Three grantees we
interviewed and representatives from the TAC grantee said they had regular
meetings with the HHS program officers to discuss progress, successes, and
challenges of their respective grants.

**Contracted an external evaluator**

HHS also began an external evaluation of these grant programs in 2022 to
measure program outcomes. The agency contracted with an external evaluator
that analyzed preliminary performance and cost data reported to HHS, collected
additional survey and interview data, and submitted the most recent interim
evaluation report in January 2025. The contract was scheduled to run through
September 2026—1 year after the grant period for the three grant programs—but
HHS terminated the contract in May 2025 due to funding changes. [18] HHS
officials said they plan to review the data collected by the contractor alongside
final reports submitted by grantees in spring 2026 to inform potential future grant

programs.

Grantees reported challenges in implementing the three HHS grant programs
related to resources, their organizations’ commitment to their workers’ well-being,
stigma, and reporting requirements, according to a 2024 interim analysis
conducted by the TAC grantee and our interviews with six selected grantees. [19]

**Resources.** According to the TAC’s interim analysis, grantees commonly

Page 8 GAO-26-107951 Health Professionals’ Mental Health

**What benefits did HHS**
**grantees report from**
**their grant program**
**activities?**

reported that resource constraints, including challenges with staffing the program
team and lack of time for health professionals to participate, made it more difficult
to implement activities. For example, two grantees we interviewed told us
participants had difficulty finding time to commit to activities as they were busy
and working long hours.

**Organizational commitment to health professionals’ well-being.** Grantees
commonly reported that their organizational policies and leadership sometimes
did not fully support health worker well-being, which could result in grant activities
being prioritized lower than other organizational policies, according to the TAC’s
interim analysis. For example, one grantee reported contradictory messages
from their organization’s management about both caring about staff work-life
balance and time to recharge versus decreases in pay if staff see fewer patients.

**Stigma.** Grantees commonly reported that the stigma health professionals can
experience when participating in activities to support their mental health was a
challenge, according to the TAC’s interim analysis. Some grantees tailored their
program content to address and respond to this. For example, one grantee
reported an increase in participation of grantee activities by avoiding the term
“therapy” and instead using terms like “team bonding” and “team
communication.”

**Reporting requirements.** The six selected grantees we interviewed said
grantees were required to report the same performance information both to HHS
and the HHS-contracted external evaluator for these grant programs. One
grantee noted that reporting the same information twice was redundant, not an
effective use of time, and this process of collecting measures multiple times
caused confusion for participants.

HHS officials told us they informed the external evaluator of grantee performance
data the department was already collecting and encouraged the evaluator to use
available data and avoid requesting duplicate data from grantees. Officials from
the external evaluator said they worked with HHS to develop a data collection
strategy that would use data that was already available. In our review of
documents with the performance data required by HHS and the external
evaluator, we found the external evaluator generally asked grantees to confirm
the accuracy of the performance measures already submitted to HHS. However,
the external evaluator’s data collection tool required grantees to report this
information in a different format and across a different reporting period. As noted,
this was seen by some grantees as a duplicate request and caused confusion for
some grantees. As described above, HHS terminated the external evaluator’s
contract in May 2025, ending its evaluation activities.

The 44 grantees of the two grant programs supporting providers and students
reported a variety of benefits from grant program activities, such as higher
retention of participants in their positions, according to data reported by grantees
and two interim TAC analyses.

Participants of the grant program supporting providers remained in their
organizations in July 2022 through June 2023 and July 2023 through June 2024
at higher rates than non-participants, according to our analysis of data reported
by grantees. [20] In contrast, retention rates were similar between participants and
non-participants in January 2022 through June 2022, the first 6 months of the
grant program. The external evaluator told us they found similar higher rates of
retention of participants as compared to non-participants of this grant program in
their analysis of retention data for July 2022 through June 2023. See figure 5 for
more information on retention rates, including rates by profession.

Page 9 GAO-26-107951 Health Professionals’ Mental Health

**Figure 5. Retention in Grantee Organizations, Promoting Resilience and Mental Health Among Health Professional Workforce Grant Program,**
**January 2022 Through June 2024**

Note: This figure presents grantee data reported from the beginning of the grant program in January 2022
through June 2024. Department of Health and Human Services collected these retention data for the listed
profession categories. Our analysis does not include data reported in the final six months of the grant program
from July through December 2024, as data for that time period was not available at the time of our review.

Additionally, two interim TAC analyses, issued in 2024 and 2025, identified other
benefits reported by grantees from the two grant programs supporting providers
and students. [21] Examples included the following.

               - Five grantees that chose to provide data to the TAC grantee reported
between seven and 37 percent lower rates of burnout following the start of
the grant program. In addition, one grantee that chose to provide data to the
TAC grantee reported a 53 percent lower rate of anxiety and a 50 percent
lower rate of depression.

               - Grantees commonly reported that their organizations increased the number
of mental health services and supports for health professionals as a result of
their grant programs; and grantees commonly reported improved
organizational workflows and a positive culture change reducing the stigma
around mental health conditions.

**Agency Comments**

**How GAO Did This**
**Study**

We provided a draft of this report to the Department of Health and Human
Services for comment. The Department provided technical comments, which we
incorporated as appropriate.

To describe what literature reports about the prevalence and severity of mental
health conditions, including substance use disorders, among health professionals
in the U.S., we conducted a literature review to identify relevant studies published
in peer-reviewed journals from January 2020 through February 2025. We
selected this time period to capture the most recent information available at the
time of our review. We identified 50 relevant studies. (See appendix I.)

We interviewed representatives from four national health care professional
organizations—American Academy of Family Physicians, American Society of
Addiction Medicine, The American Nurses Association, and The Dr. Lorna Breen
Heroes Foundation and ALL IN: Wellbeing First for Healthcare Coalition—about
their perspectives on the prevalence and severity of mental health conditions
among professionals as well as risk factors that may contribute to these

Page 10 GAO-26-107951 Health Professionals’ Mental Health

conditions. We selected health professional organizations that conduct research
on and take actions related to addressing mental health conditions among health
professionals. The views of these representatives of stakeholder organizations
are not generalizable to all health professionals but rather provide illustrative
examples of experiences of particular groups of health professionals.

We also reviewed information from HHS and other agency documents to identify
any risk factors affecting mental health conditions among health professionals.
We synthesized the information from our literature review, interviews with
representatives of stakeholder organizations, and document reviews to describe
the prevalence and severity of mental health conditions among health
professionals.

We included three HHS-identified federal grant programs in our review that were
ongoing at the time we began our work in November 2024, and that specifically
focused on addressing mental health conditions and substance use disorders
among health professionals. We did not include in our review grant programs for
mental health and substance use disorder efforts more broadly, such as the
State Opioid Response Grants, although some grant funding from those grants
may have been allowable to use to support health professionals.

To obtain information on the three HHS-identified grant programs, we reviewed
information from federal sources, all 45 grantees across the three grant
programs, and the four stakeholder organizations. We collected information from
HHS about three grant programs, including information on the characteristics of
these grant programs, such as activities performed by grantees, HHS oversight
of grantee activities, and any grantee-reported challenges and benefits. We also
reviewed grant award data from the HHS Tracking Accountability in Government
Grants System, which is a database of grants awarded by the twelve Operating
Divisions of HHS.

We also collected and reviewed data from the HHS Data Dashboard on Health
Professions Training Programs—a system that displays aggregated performance
data for Health Resources and Services Administration-awarded health
professions training grants. Grantees of the two grant programs supporting
providers and students reported training activities for January 2022 through June
2024, the most recent period available on the Data Dashboard.

To assess the reliability of the HHS award data and grantee-reported
performance data, we reviewed documentation describing the data and
interviewed HHS officials about data collection processes. We determined that
the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of reporting on the
characteristics of three grant programs; HHS’s oversight of these grant
programs; and the effects of the grant programs.

We also reviewed HHS documentation related to the three HHS-identified grants,
such as notices of funding opportunities posted in July and August 2021, and
HHS’s oversight of these grants, such as performance measure manuals and
guidance. Additionally, we reviewed and analyzed annual performance reports
and annual non-competing continuation reports from January 2022 through June
2024, for completeness and reported benefits. We also reviewed three HHSfunded technical assistance grantee’s interim analyses on grantee-reported
activities, challenges, and benefits. [22]

We interviewed officials from HHS involved with administering the three grant
awards and six selected grantees on topics regarding grant activities, HHS
oversight, and reported benefits of these programs. We selected the grantees
based on criteria including variation in business type (e.g., academic institution,
health provider organization, research organization), organization type (e.g.,

Page 11 GAO-26-107951 Health Professionals’ Mental Health

**List of Addressees**

**GAO Contact**

**Information**

public, non-profit, private), and geographic location. The views of these grantees
are not generalizable to all 45 grantee participants.

We conducted this performance audit from November 2024 to March 2026 in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence
obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on
our objectives.

The Honorable Bill Cassidy, M.D.
Chair

The Honorable Bernard Sanders
Ranking Member
Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
United States Senate

The Honorable Brett Guthrie

Chairman
The Honorable Frank Pallone, Jr.
Ranking Member
Committee on Energy and Commerce
House of Representatives

We are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional
committees, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, and other interested
parties. In addition, the report is available at no charge on the GAO website at
[https://www.gao.gov.](https://www.gao.gov/)

For more information, contact: Alyssa M. Hundrup, Director, Health Care,
[hundrupa@gao.gov.](mailto:hundrupa@gao.gov)

[Public Affairs: Sarah Kaczmarek, Managing Director, Media@gao.gov.](mailto:Media@gao.gov)

Congressional Relations: David A. Powner, Acting Managing Director,
[CongRel@gao.gov](mailto:CongRel@gao.gov)

**Staff Acknowledgments:** Amy Leone (Assistant Director), Fatima Sharif
(Analyst in Charge), Haley Samuel-Jakubos, Laurie Pachter, Sarah Craig, Ariel
Landa-Seiersen, Diona Martyn, Patricia Powell, Ethiene Salgado-Rodriguez, and
Sirin Yaemsiri made key contributions to this report.

[Connect with GAO on Facebook, X, LinkedIn, Instagram, and YouTube.](https://www.facebook.com/usgao)
[Subscribe to our Email Updates. Listen to our Podcasts.](https://www.gao.gov/about/contact-us/stay-connected)

[Visit GAO on the web at https://www.gao.gov.](https://www.gao.gov/)

This is a work of the U.S. government but may include copyrighted material. For
[details, see https://www.gao.gov/copyright.](https://www.gao.gov/copyright)

Page 12 GAO-26-107951 Health Professionals’ Mental Health

**Appendix I: Literature**
**Review Scope and**
**Methodology**

To describe what the literature reports about the prevalence and severity of
mental health and substance use disorder among health professionals, we
conducted a literature review to identify relevant studies published in peerreviewed journals from January 2020 to February 2025. We chose this time
frame to reflect the most recent information available at the time of our review.

We searched for research published in relevant peer-reviewed journals in the
Coronavirus Research Database, Health & Medical Collection, PTSDpubs,
Publicly Available Content Database, Research Library, SciTech Premium
Collection, and Sociology Collection, among others, in ProQuest; AgeLine, APA
PsycArticles, CINAHL with Full Text, E-Journals, and MEDLINE in EBSCOhost;
all Healthcare Collection databases with the exception of MEDLINE in ProQuest
Dialog; and Scopus. A research librarian constructed search strings to return
studies that focused on health professionals and burnout, substance use
disorders, common mental illnesses, mental health and mental illness generally,
or resilience. The librarian reviewed the results of these searches and identified
the subset that dealt specifically with prevalence or severity of mental health or
substance use disorders among health professionals in the U.S. After excluding
duplicates, we identified and reviewed 156 abstracts that included systematic
reviews and meta-analyses, and single studies when systematic reviews or
meta-analyses were not available on a given search topic.

Of the 156 abstracts, we found 55 abstracts to be relevant. For these, we
obtained and reviewed the full study and identified that these articles met the
following criteria: (1) had numerical data on the prevalence and severity of
mental health and substance use disorders among health professionals, (2)
referenced mental health conditions and expressions of mental health through
descriptions of clinical diagnosed disorders and information on resilience and
mental wellness, (3) included health professionals generally or specific to clinical
or non-clinical roles across health disciplines and, for single study searches, for
burnout limited to emergency medicine, OBGYN and oncology, (4) examined
health professionals in the U.S., (5) were published in a peer-reviewed journal,
and (6) were published from January 2020 to February 2025.

We also assessed the research methodology of these articles to determine
whether each article was appropriate to include in our literature review. Two
technical reviewers assessed each study, including the study’s research design,
and strengths and limitations. We also assessed the extent to which each study’s
findings were generalizable to the health professional population in the U.S. We
determined that 50 of the 55 articles were relevant for inclusion based on their
research methodology. See below for a complete list of the 50 relevant studies
we reviewed categorized by our assessment of generalizability.

Our report presents findings from the body of knowledge included in these
articles. We primarily drew from generalizable articles to the overall health
professional population or specific professions (e.g., nurses) in the U.S. and used
non-generalizable articles for those mental health topics for which we did not
identify generalizable studies of support. Of the 11 generalizable articles, four
were generalizable to the entire health professional workforce and seven were
generalizable to specific health professions (e.g., nursing). All studies have
limitations and to varying extents make assumptions about health professional
mental health. Despite these limitations, we determined that the studies we
included provide reliable information about the prevalence of mental health
among health professionals.

Page 13 GAO-26-107951 Health Professionals’ Mental Health

**Generalizable studies GAO reviewed**

Davidson, J. E., H. Makhija, K. C. Lee, et al. “National Incidence of Nurse Suicide and
Associated Features.” _The Journal of Nursing Administration_, vol. 54, no.12 (2024): 649–
656.

Davis, M. A., B. A. Y. Cher, C. R. Friese, and J.P.W. Bynum (2021). “Association of US
Nurse and Physician Occupation with Risk of Suicide.” _JAMA Psychiatry_, vol. 78, no. 6
(2021): 651–658.

Ji, Y. D., F. C. Robertson, N. A. Patel, Z. S. Peacock, and C. M. Resnick. “Assessment of
Risk Factors for Suicide Among US Health Care Professionals.” _JAMA Surgery_, vol. 155,
no. 8 (2020): 713–721.

Jun, J., H. L. Tubbs-Cooley, and M. A. Davis. “Health Care Support Worker Status,
Health Behaviors, Mental Health, and Preventive Health Care Use.” _JAMA Network_
_Open_, vol. 6, no. 12 (2023): e2348578.

Kreuze, E., J. York, and E. I. Merwin. “Suicide Mortality Among Nurses in the United
States: Incidence, Factors Associated with Suicide, Circumstances Preceding Suicide,
and Methods of Suicide.” _Issues In Mental Health Nursing_, vol. 46, no. 4 (2025): 310–
319.

Nguyen, O. T., L. J. Merlo, K. A. Meese, K. Turner, and A. A. Tabriz, and K. Turner.
“Anxiety and Depression Risk Among Healthcare Workers During the COVID-19
Pandemic: Findings from the US Census Household Pulse Survey.” _Journal of General_
_Internal Medicine_, vol. 38, no. 2 (2022): 558–561.

Nigam, J. A. S., R. M. Barker, T. R. Cunningham, N. G. Swanson, and L. C. Chosewood.
"Vital Signs: Health Worker–Perceived Working Conditions and Symptoms of Poor
Mental Health—Quality of Worklife Survey, United States, 2018–2022.” _Morbidity and_
_Mortality Weekly Report_, vol. 72, no. 44 (2023): 1197–1205.

Olfson, M., C. M. Cosgrove, M. M. Wall, and C. Blanco. “Suicide Risks of Health Care
Workers in the US.” _JAMA_, vol. 330, no. 12 (2023): 1161–1166.

Patrician, P. A., C. Peterson, and T. M. McGuinness. “Suicide Among RNs: An Analysis
of 2015 Data from the National Violent Death Reporting System.” _The American Journal_
_of Nursing_, vol. 120, no.10 (2020): 24–28.

Silver, S. R., J. Li, S. M. Marsh, and E. G. Carbone. “Prepandemic Mental Health and
Well-being: Differences within the Health Care Workforce and the Need for Targeted
Resources.” _Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine_, vol. 64, no.12 (2022):
1025–1035.

Ye, G. Y., J. E. Davidson, K. Kim, and S. Zisook. “Physician Death by Suicide in the
United States: 2012-2016.” _Journal of Psychiatric Research_, vol. 134, (2021):158–165.

**Non-generalizable studies GAO reviewed**

Abraham, C. M., K. Zheng, and L. Poghosyan. "Predictors and Outcomes of Burnout
among Primary Care Providers in the United States: A Systematic Review." _Medical Care_
_Research and Review,_ vol _._ 77, no. 5 (2020): 387-401.

Abrahim, H. L., and E. A. Holman. “A Scoping Review of The Literature Addressing
Psychological Well-being of Racial and Ethnic Minority Nurses During the COVID-19
Pandemic.” _Nursing Outlook_, vol. 71, no 1. (2023) 101899.

Berardo, L., C. Gerges, J. Wright, et al. "Assessment of Burnout Prevention and Wellness
Programs for US-Based Neurosurgical Faculty and Residents: A Systematic Review of
the Literature." _Journal of Neurosurgery,_ vol. 135, (2021): 392-400.

Bogardus, J., E. S. Armstrong, T. VanOss, and D. J. Brown. “Stress, Anxiety,
Depression, and Perfectionism Among Graduate Students in Health Sciences Programs.”
_Journal of Allied Health_, vol. 51, no. 1 (2022): e15–e25.

Bryant-Genevier, J., C. Y. Rao, B. Lopes-Cardozo, et al. “Symptoms of Depression,
Anxiety, Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, and Suicidal Ideation Among State, Tribal,

Page 14 GAO-26-107951 Health Professionals’ Mental Health

Local, and Territorial Public Health Workers During the COVID-19 Pandemic - United
States, March-April 2021.” _Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report_, vol. 70, no. 48 (2021):
1680-1685.

Campbell, B. M., M. A. Knipp, S. S. Anwar, and R. A. Hoopsick. “Moral Injury and
Substance Use Among United States Healthcare Workers.” _Stress And Health_, vol. 40,
no. 3 (2024): e3321.

Carim, C. A., N. E. Keller, G. G. Greene, K. D. Pitchford, T. M. Solh, and P. M. Miller.
“Substance Use Among Physician Assistant Students: A National Study on the
Prevalence of Alcohol, Tobacco, Illicit Substances, and Medication Use.” _The Journal of_
_Physician Assistant Education_, vol. 34, no. 2 (2023): 91–97.

Crowe, H. M., L. Sampson, A. C. Purdue-Smithe, K. M. Rexrode, K. C. Koenen, and J.
W. Rich-Edwards. “Bidirectional Analysis of the Association Between Migraine and Posttraumatic Stress Disorder in Nurses' Health Study II.” _Epidemiology and Psychiatric_
_Sciences_, vol. 33 (2024): e76, 1-9.

Davis, E. M., M. R. Kauffman, K. E. Welborn, S. Bachor, and P. M. Miller. “Stressed and
Depressed: Prevalence of Anxiety and/or Depression in Physician Assistant
Students.” _The Journal of Physician Assistant Education_, vol. _35_, no.1 (2024): 21–26.

Eldridge, L. A., C. G. Estrich, J. R. Gurenlian, et al. “United States Dental Health Care
Workers' Mental Health During the COVID-19 Pandemic.” _The_ _Journal of Dental Hygiene_,
vol. 96, no. 4 (2022): 9-19.

Foli, K. J., A. K. Forster, L. A. Bostic, L. Zhang, Z. Zhang, and L. Stone. “Predictors of
Substance Use Risk In Nurse Anesthetists.” _Journal Of Addictions Nursing_, vol. 35, no. 1
(2024): E15–E27.

Gainer, D. M., R. W. Nahhas, N. V. Bhatt, A. Merrill, and J. McCormack. “Association
Between Proportion of Workday Treating COVID-19 and Depression, Anxiety, and PTSD
Outcomes in US Physicians.” _Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine_, vol.
63, no. 2 (2021): 89–97.

Gisewhite, S., A. Reith, X. Liu, and R. M. Oetjen. "Burnout Among Physician Assistants:
A Systematic Review." _The Journal of Medical Practice Management:_ (2021): 195-204.

Halperin, S. J., M. N. Henderson, S. Prenner, and J. N. Grauer. “Prevalence of Anxiety
and Depression Among Medical Students During the Covid-19 Pandemic: A CrossSectional Study.” _Journal of Medical Education and Curricular Development_, vol 8 (2021):
1-7.

Hennein, R., E. J. Mew, and S. R. Lowe. “Socio-ecological Predictors of Mental Health
Outcomes Among Healthcare Workers During the COVID-19 Pandemic in the United
States.” _PloS One_, vol. 16, no. 2 (2021): e0246602.

Hoff, T., and D.R. Lee. “Burnout and Physician Gender: What Do We Know?” _Medical_
_Care,_ vol. 59, no.8 (2021): 711-720.

Hoff, T., K. Trovato, and A. Kitsakos. “Burnout Among Family Physicians in the United
States: A Review of the Literature.” _Quality Management in Health Care,_ vol. 33, no. 1
(2024): 1-11.

Hughes, T. M., J. F. Waljee, Y. Fang, S. Sen, and A. Bohnert. “New-Onset Depression
Among Surgical Interns.” _JAMA Surgery_, vol. 157, no. 6 (2022): 543–545.

Jackson, T. N., D. L. Jackson, P.R. Nelson, D. Y. Kim, V. Agrawal, and M.S. Truitt.
“Traumatized Attendings—When the Doctor Has the Disease.” _The American Journal of_
_Surgery_, vol. 223, (2022): 626–632.

Jupina, M., M. W. Sidle, and C. J. Rehmeyer Caudill. “Medical Student Mental Health
During the COVID-19 Pandemic.” _The Clinical Teacher_, vol. 19, no. 5 (2022): e13518.

Kameg, B. N., D. Lindsay, H. Lee, and A. Mitchell. “Substance Use and Exposure to
Adverse Childhood Experiences in Undergraduate and Graduate Nursing
Students.” _Journal of the American Psychiatric Nurses Association_, vol. _26_, no. 4 (2020):
354–363.

Page 15 GAO-26-107951 Health Professionals’ Mental Health

Kone, A., L. Horter, C. Rose, et al. “The Impact of Traumatic Experiences, Coping
Mechanisms, and Workplace Benefits on the Mental Health of U.S. Public Health
Workers During the COVID-19 Pandemic.” _Annals of Epidemiology_, vol. 74, (2022): 66–
74.

Kratzke, I. M., L. C. Woods, K. Adapa, M. R Kapadia and L. Mazur. “The Sociotechnical
Factors Associated with Burnout in Residents in Surgical Specialties: A Qualitative
Systematic Review.” _Journal of Surgical Education_, vol. 79, no. 3 (2022): 614–623.

McQuade, B. M., B. N. Reed, R. J. DiDomenico, W. L. Baker, A. G. Shipper, and J. B.
Jarrett. “Feeling The Burn? A Systematic Review of Burnout In Pharmacists.” _Journal of_
_the American College of Clinical Pharmacy_, vol. 3, (2020): 663-675.

Merkle, S. L., M. Welton, A. Van Zyl, et al. “Symptoms of Depression, Anxiety, and PostTraumatic Stress Disorder, and Suicidal Ideation Among School Nurses in
Prekindergarten through Grade 12 Schools - United States, March 2022.” _The Journal of_
_School Nursing_, vol. 39, no. 2 (2023):114–124.

Okon, S. A., T. N. Khan, N. J. Duffy, C. C. Roan, and R. A. Hoopsick. “Effects of
Compassion Satisfaction, Burnout, and Secondary Traumatic Stress on Current Drug
Use Among Healthcare Workers: Differences by Occupational Level.” _Addictive_
_Behaviors Reports_, vol. 21, (2025):1-8.

Papa, A., A. H. Okun, J. P. Barile, H. Jia, W. W. Thompson, and R. J. Guerin. “Patterns
and Correlates of Traumatic Stress, Depression, Anxiety, and Moral Injury in U.S. Health
Care Providers Late in the COVID-19 Pandemic.” _Psychological Trauma: Theory,_
_Research, Practice and Policy_, (2024): 1-9.

Ptak, M. K., E. Frank, K. E. T. Ross, J. L. Cleary, S. Sen, and K. Pereira-Lima.
“Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Symptoms Among First-Year Resident Physicians
Working Before and During the COVID-19 Pandemic.” _JAMA Network Open_, vol. 6, no. 8
(2023): e2330241.

Rodriguez, R. M., J. C. C. Montoy, K. F. Hoth, et al. “Symptoms of Anxiety, Burnout, and
PTSD and the Mitigation Effect of Serologic Testing in Emergency Department Personnel
During the COVID-19 Pandemic.” _Annals of Emergency Medicine_, vol. 78, no. 1 (2021):
35–43.e2.

Ruth-Sahd, L. A., and M. A. Schneider. “Alcohol Use and Binge Drinking in
Baccalaureate Nursing Students: A Descriptive Study.” _Journal of Professional Nursing,_
vol. _38_ (2022): 114–120.

Sampson, L., S. C. Jha, A. L. Roberts, et al. “Trauma, Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder,
and Treatment Among Middle-Aged and Older Women in the Nurses' Health Study II.”
_The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry_, vol. 30, no. 5 (2022): 588–602.

Sauder, M., I. Zagales, R. Zagales, et al. “Comprehensive Assessment of Burnout
Among Surgical Trainees and Practicing Surgeons: A Systematic Review.” _Journal of_
_Surgical Education_, vol. 79, no. 5 (2022): 1188–1205.

Scarbecz, M., E. J. DeSchepper, N. L. Dyer, and A. O. Blanton. “Alcohol Use Among US
Dental Students: Results of a Nationwide Survey.” _Journal of Dental Education_, vol. 86,
(2022): 934–948.

Stone, K. W., M. A. Jagger, J. A. Horney, and K. W. Kintziger. “Changes in Anxiety and
Depression Among Public Health Workers During the COVID-19 Pandemic Response.”
_International Archives of Occupational and Environmental Health_, vol. 96 (2023): 1235–
1244.

Swanson, G. R., B. A. Schwartz, C. Joyce, and A. Keshavarzian. “Binge Drinking Alcohol
and Circadian Misalignment in Night Shift Nurses is Associated with Decreased
Resiliency to COVID-19 Infection.” _Alcohol, Clinical & Experimental Research_, vol. 47 _,_
no. 5 (2023): 908–918.

Tiet, Q. Q., J. Brooks, and C. Patton. “Risk Factors of PTSD And Substance Use
Disorders in Clinical and Counseling Psychology Doctoral Students.” _Psychological_
_Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice and Policy_, (2024):1-9.

Page 16 GAO-26-107951 Health Professionals’ Mental Health

**Endnotes**

Trinkoff, A. M., V. L. Selby, K. Han, et al. “The Prevalence of Substance Use and
Substance Use Problems in Registered Nurses: Estimates from the Nurse Worklife and
Wellness Study.” _Journal of Nursing Regulation,_ vol. 12, no. 4 (2022): 1-12.

Trockel, M. T., C. P. West, L. N. Dyrbye, et al. “Assessment of Adverse Childhood
Experiences, Adverse Professional Experiences, Depression, and Burnout in
US Physicians.” _Mayo Clinic Proceedings_, vol. 98, no. 12 (2023): 1785–1796.

Vance, M. C., H. B. H. Mash, R. J. Ursano, et al. “Exposure to Workplace Trauma and
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Among Intern Physicians.” _JAMA Network Open_, vol. 4,
no. 6 (2021): e2112837.

1 The prevalence of mental health conditions among health professionals varied across the
literature we reviewed. Of the 50 studies we reviewed, four were generalizable to the entire health
professional workforce and seven were generalizable to specific health professions (e.g., nursing
profession).

2 This study defined health workers as a wide variety of occupations including direct health care
workers and support roles among other roles. Researchers assessed depression and anxiety using
the four-question Patient Health Questionnaire. See Jeannie A.S. Nigam, Michael Barker, Thomas
R. Cunningham, et al., "Vital Signs: Health Worker-Perceived Working Conditions and Symptoms
of Poor Mental Health—Quality of Worklife Survey, United States, 2018–2022,” _Morbidity and_
_Mortality Weekly Report_, vol. 72, no. 44 (2023): 1197–1205.

3 This study surveyed actively licensed nursing professionals from November 2020 through March
2021. The authors acknowledged the findings may not be generalizable to all nursing
professionals. Researchers assessed substance use problems and disorders using nine questions
adapted from the Drug Abuse Screening Test and from the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. See Alison M. Trinkoff, Victoria L. Selby, Kihye Han, et al.,
“The Prevalence of Substance Use and Substance Use Problems in Registered Nurses: Estimates
from the Nurse Worklife and Wellness Study,” _Journal of Nursing Regulation,_ vol. 12, no. 4 (2022):
1-12.

4 Data were from the National Violent Death Reporting System, which includes data on suicide and
homicide among other causes of death. Researchers identified registered nurses from the
occupation listed on the decedents’ death certificates. See Judy E. Davidson, Hirsh Makhija, Kelly
C. Lee, et al., “National Incidence of Nurse Suicide and Associated Features,” _The Journal of_
_Nursing Administration_, vol. 54, no.12 (2024): 649–656.

5 This study assessed burnout with a single self-reported item about feeling “used up.” Nigam et
al., "Vital Signs: Health Worker–Perceived Working Conditions and Symptoms of Poor Mental
Health,” 1197-1205.

6 The Medscape surveys reported percentages of respondents who felt burned out (the prevalence
we cite), depressed, both burned out and depressed, or neither of these. See Jon McKenna, “’If
Boundaries Are Set, It Is Possible': Medscape Physician Mental Health & Well-Being Report 2025,”
_Medscape_, (Jan. 2025); Jennifer Nelson, “Finding Renewed Resilience: Physician Assistant
Burnout & Depression Report 2024,” _Medscape_, (Oct. 2024); and Jennifer Nelson, “A Silent
Struggle: Medscape Nurse Practitioner Burnout & Depression Report 2024,” _Medscape,_ (Aug.
2024).

7 Nigam et al., "Vital Signs: Health Worker-Perceived Working Conditions and Symptoms of Poor
Mental Health,” 1197-1205.

8 Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, _Impact Wellbeing™ Guide: Taking action to improve_
_healthcare worker wellbeing_, Publication 2024-109 (Washington, D.C.: revised July 2024).

9 All In WellBeing First for Healthcare Dr. Lorna Breen Heroes’ Foundation, _Remove Intrusive_
_Mental Health Questions from Licensure and Credentialing Applications: A Toolkit to Audit,_
_Change, and Communicate,_ (2022).

Page 17 GAO-26-107951 Health Professionals’ Mental Health

10 We reviewed federal grant databases and program inventories and confirmed that these three
grant programs represented the totality of grant programs targeting health professional mental
health at the time we began our work in November 2024.

11 The American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 appropriated funding for grants to health professionals
and other organizations to promote mental health and reduce substance abuse among health
professionals. Pub. L. No. 117-2, §§ 2703 - 2705, 135 Stat. 4, 46. Additionally, the Dr. Lorna Breen
Health Care Provider Protection Act authorized grants to health care entities and health
professions’ schools to address mental health conditions and substance use disorder among health
professionals. Pub. L. No. 117-105, § 3, 136 Stat. 1118, 1120 (2022). However, only the American
Rescue Plan Act of 2021 appropriated funding for such grants during fiscal years 2022 through
2024.

12 Forty-four grantees from two of the grant programs provided direct services to health
professionals. The grantee from the third grant program provided support to the 44 grantees. The
interim analyses described in this report should not be interpreted as conclusive, as some HRSA
grantees are still reporting on their activities and outcomes.

13 Officials from the TAC grantee said information contained in this TAC grantee analysis was based
on survey, interview, and focus group data and grantee publications on the impact of grantee
activities in 2022 and 2023 from the grantees of the two grant programs supporting provider and
students. See Workplace Change Collaborative, _Impacts of the HRSA Health Workforce Well-_
_Being Program,_ (Washington, D.C.: Fitzhugh Mullan Institute for Health Workforce Equity, 2025).

14 For the Technical Assistance Center’s analysis of grantee activities, see Candice Chen, Julia
Strasser, Randl Dent, et al., “How Can Health Care Organizations Address Burnout? A Description
of the Dr. Lorna Breen Act Grantee _s,”_ _American Journal of Public Health_, vol. 114, no. s2 (2024):
S148-S151.

15 Candice Chen, et al., “How Can Health Care Organizations Address Burnout? A Description of
the Dr. Lorna Breen Act Grantee _s.”_

16 HHS required grantees to complete narrative reports annually. We found all 45 grantees
submitted non-compete continuation reports to HHS for years 1 and 2 of the award period
(calendar years 2022 and 2023). HHS also required final reports, which is to comprise a final
narrative and a federal financial report to be submitted by grantees in 2025, or, if they received a
no-cost extension, in 2026 according to HHS officials.

17 HHS required the 44 grantees of the two grant programs supporting providers and students to
complete annual performance reports from January 2022 through 2024. We found that the 44
grantees submitted over 99 percent of performance data they were required to report from January
2022 through June 2024. HHS did not require the Technical Assistance Center grantee to submit
these reports, because it did not support individual providers and students.

18 According to HHS officials, the agency terminated the evaluation contract in accordance with
Section 3 of Executive Order 14222: Implementing the President’s “Department of Government
Efficiency” Cost Efficiency Initiative to reduce overall federal spending. We did not assess HHS’s
decision to terminate this contract in this review.

19 This TAC grantee analysis was limited to qualitative reports from surveys and follow-up interviews
with 36 out of the 44 grantees. Data collection occurred 18 months into the 3-year grant period
(2022 to 2024). See Randl Dent, Julia Strasser, Lauren Muñoz, et al., “Lessons Learned from the
Health Resources and Services Administration Health Workforce Well-Being Grantees,” _Families,_
_Systems, & Health_, vol. 42, no. 3 (2024): 317-332.

20 Grantees reported data each academic year to HHS as part of the Annual Performance Report.
Since participation in grantee activities is voluntary and non-randomized, analysis of the grantee
reported Annual Performance Report data does not reflect confounding factors that might affect
retention.

21 These TAC interim analyses were limited to surveys and qualitative reports that provided
snapshots in time reported by grantees from 2022 through 2024. The interim analyses described in
this report should not be interpreted as conclusive, as it was optional for grantees to report
information to TAC and some grantees are still reporting on their activities and outcomes.
Workplace Change Collaborative, _Impacts of the HRSA Health Workforce Well-Being Program_ and
Randl Dent, et al., “Lessons Learned from the Health Resources and Services Administration
Health Workforce Well-Being Grantees.”

Page 18 GAO-26-107951 Health Professionals’ Mental Health

22 Candice Chen, et al., “How Can Health Care Organizations Address Burnout? A Description of
the Dr. Lorna Breen Act Grantees,” (2024); Workplace Change Collaborative, _Impacts of the HRSA_
_Health Workforce Well-Being Program,_ (2025); and Randl Dent, et al., “Lessons Learned from the
Health Resources and Services Administration Health Workforce Well-Being Grantees,” (2024).

Page 19 GAO-26-107951 Health Professionals’ Mental Health