# U.S. Postal Service: Urgent Action Needed to Fix Unsustainable Business Model and Improve Service Performance

**Report:** GAO-26-109008 | **Published:** 2026-03-17 | **Source:** [U.S. Government Accountability Office](https://www.gao.gov/products/gao-26-109008)

---

## Highlights

### What GAO Found

The U.S. Postal Service (USPS) continues to be in poor financial condition. It has 
lost money every fiscal year but one since 2007 (see figure). While accumulating 
$118 billion in net losses over that time, USPS has maintained enough cash 
reserves to continue operations. It has done so in part by borrowing from the 
U.S. Treasury the maximum $15 billion it is allowed by statute and by either not 
making or only partially making required annual funding payments towards its 
liabilities for retiree health and pension benefits. With billions in new expenses 
expected by 2031, USPS’s financial condition is at a critical point. The 
Postmaster General has stated that USPS could run out of cash in early 2027.   
U.S. Postal Service (USPS) Total Expenses and Total Revenue, Fiscal Years 2007-
2025 
 
In 2021, USPS introduced a 10-year strategic plan designed to improve its 
financial condition while fulfilling its statutory mandates. Since then, USPS has 
taken several actions to increase revenue and reduce expenses, such as raising 
prices, realigning its transportation network, and redesigning its processing 
operations. In addition, Congress provided some financial relief through the 
Postal Service Reform Act of 2022. However, these actions have not been 
enough to fix USPS’s unsustainable business model. As GAO has reported, 
USPS will need to continue to take actions within its own authority to increase its 
revenues and reduce expenses. Additionally, Congress should take timely action 
to determine the services it wants USPS to provide and the extent to which 
USPS should be self-sustaining, consistent with GAO’s prior recommendations. 
USPS’s service performance has continued to decline in recent years despite 
lower service standards. Specifically, in fiscal year 2022, USPS revised certain 
First-Class Mail service standards from a 1-to-3-day delivery window to a 1-to-5-
day window. However, since then, USPS data shows that on-time performance 
has generally declined. For example, First-Class Mail on-time performance 
declined from 91 percent to about 86 percent from fiscal year 2022 to 2025. Both 
the USPS Office of the Inspector General and the Postal Regulatory Commission 
have raised concerns about USPS’s service standards and performance, 
including possible service impacts on customers in rural areas.

### Why GAO Did This Study

USPS’s financial viability has been on 
GAO’s High-Risk List since 2009 as 
rising costs and lower mail volumes 
have made its business model 
unsustainable. There is a fundamental 
tension between the level of service 
Congress expects USPS to provide and 
the revenue USPS can reasonably be 
expected to generate. It is critical for 
USPS and Congress to address 
USPS’s unsustainable business model 
before it is responsible for billions in 
new annual expenses for retiree health 
care within the next 5 years.  
This statement discusses: 1) USPS’s 
current financial condition, 2) actions 
USPS and Congress have taken to 
address its financial condition, and 3) 
USPS’s service performance.  
GAO’s description of USPS’s current 
financial condition and the actions it has 
taken to address that condition is based 
on GAO’s prior work, including the 2025 
High-Risk Update. GAO’s description of 
USPS’s service performance is based 
on GAO’s prior work and recent reports 
from the USPS Office of the Inspector 
General and the Postal Regulatory 
Commission.

### What GAO Recommends

GAO previously reported that USPS 
should continue to take actions to 
address its financial condition. GAO 
also reiterates that Congress should 
consider, among other things, fully 
addressing the level of postal service 
the nation requires and the extent to 
which USPS should be financially self-
sustaining.

---

Tuesday, March 17, 2026

**United** **States** **Government Accountability** **Office**
### Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Government Operations, Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, House of Representatives

# U.S. POSTAL SERVICE Urgent Action Needed to Fix Unsustainable Business Model and Improve Service Performance

###### Statement of David Marroni, Director, Physical Infrastructure

A testimony before the Subcommittee on Government Operations, Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, House of
Representatives
[Contact: David Marroni at MarroniD@gao.gov](mailto:MarroniD@gao.gov)

## Letter

**Letter**

March 17, 2026

Chairman Sessions, Ranking Member Mfume, and Members of the
Subcommittee:

Thank you for the opportunity to discuss our work on the U.S. Postal
Service’s (USPS) financial condition and service performance. USPS’s
financial viability has been on our High Risk list since 2009 as rising costs
and lower mail volume have made its business model unsustainable. [1]

There is a fundamental tension between the level of service Congress
expects and what revenue USPS can reasonably be expected to
generate. While USPS is expected to be self-sufficient, it also must meet
requirements such as serving all communities in the United States. As we
reported in December 2025, USPS has lost money almost every fiscal
year since 2007, even though Congress created it to be financially selfsufficient. [2]

Both USPS and Congress have taken steps to try to make USPS
financially self-sufficient. In 2021, USPS introduced a 10-year strategic
plan, designed to restore USPS’s financial self-sufficiency. [3] In addition,
Congress passed the Postal Service Reform Act of 2022, which, among
other things, provided USPS about $57 billion in noncash financial relief. [4]
Despite these efforts, USPS cannot fully fund its current level of services
and financial obligations as it continues to lose money—about $31 billion
since fiscal year 2021. [5] These losses prevent USPS from addressing its
large unfunded liabilities for pensions and retiree health care benefits,

1 GAO, _U.S. Postal Service: Restructuring Urgently Needed to Achieve Financial Viability_,
[GAO-09-958T (Washington D.C.: Aug. 6, 2009) and High-Risk Series:](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-09-958T) _Heightened_
_Attention Could Save Billions More and Improve Government Efficiency and_
_Effectiveness_ [, GAO-25-107743 (Washington D.C.: Feb. 25, 2025).](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-25-107743)

2 GAO, _U.S. Postal Service: Action Needed to Fix Unsustainable Business Model,_
[GAO-26-107336 (Washington, D.C.: Dec](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-26-107336) _._ 16, 2025). USPS recorded net income of about
$56 billion in fiscal year 2022 due to the effect of the Postal Service Reform Act of 2022.
The act, among other things, cancelled USPS’s missed retiree health care prefunding
payments, which USPS reported as a one-time, noncash benefit of about $57 billion.

3 United States Postal Service, _Delivering for America: Our Vision and Ten-Year Plan to_
_Achieve Financial Sustainability and Service Excellence_ (Washington, D.C.: March 23
2021). USPS updated its strategic plan in 2024. United States Postal Service, _Delivering_
_for America 2.0: Fulfilling the Promise_ (Washington, D.C.: Sept.30, 2024).

4 Pub. L. No. 117-108, 136 Stat. 1127.

5 These losses are from fiscal years 2021 through 2025. This figure does not include the
$57 billion in noncash financial relief from the Postal Service Reform Act of 2022.

putting taxpayers at increased risk of having to meet these liabilities for
USPS.

As we have previously reported, it is critical for USPS and Congress to
address USPS’s unsustainable business model before it will be
responsible for billions in new annual expenses for retiree health care,
likely in 2031. The sooner actions are taken to improve USPS’s financial
health, the less drastic those actions will need to be to address the
fundamental tension between the expense of providing the level of postal
services Congress expects and the revenue USPS can earn from that
level of service. [6]

My statement today discusses: (1) USPS’s current financial condition, (2)
actions USPS and Congress has taken to address its financial condition,
and (3) the current state of USPS’s service performance. This statement
is based primarily on our prior work on USPS’s financial condition and
GAO’s latest High-Risk Update, released in February 2025. [7] In those
reports, we reviewed USPS documentation on its financial condition,
analyzed relevant USPS data, and interviewed USPS officials, as well as
relevant postal stakeholders. More detailed information on the objectives,
scope, and methodology for that work can be found in the issued reports.

For updates on USPS’s current financial condition and future projections,
we reviewed and summarized its financial reports, original 10-year
strategic plan released in 2021, and its most recent update to the
strategic plan released in 2024, reports to Congress, and other reports
that contained financial information for fiscal year 2025. [8] To describe
USPS’s service performance, we consulted recent reports from the USPS
Office of Inspector General (OIG) and the Postal Regulatory

6 GAO-26-107336.

7 GAO, _U.S. Postal Service: Strategies and Options to Facilitate Progress toward Financial_
_Viability_ [, GAO-10-455 (Washington, D.C.: Apr. 12, 2010);](http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-10-455) _U.S. Postal Service: Key_
_Considerations for Restoring Fiscal Sustainability_ [, GAO-17-404T (Washington D.C.:](http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-17-404T)
Feb.7, 2017); _U.S. Postal Service: Congressional Action is Essential to Enable a_
_Sustainable Business Model_ [, GAO-20-385 (Washington, D.C.: May 7, 2020);](http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-20-385)
[GAO-25-107743;](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-25-107743) _U.S. Postal Service Primer: Updated Answers to Key Questions About_
_Reform Issues_ [, GAO-26-107657, (Washington, D.C.: Dec.17, 2025); and](http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-26-107657)
GAO-26-107366.

8 United States Postal Service, _Delivering for America; Delivering for America 2.0_ ; _Fiscal_
_Year 2025 Integrated Financial Plan_ (Washington, D.C.: Dec. 13, 2024); _Form 10-K Fiscal_
_Year 2025_ (Nov. 14, 2025); _Fiscal Year 2025 Annual Report to Congress_, (Dec. 29, 2025).

#### USPS’s Current Financial Condition Is Poor as Expenses Continue to Exceed Revenue

Commission. [9] We also analyzed publicly available USPS service
performance targets and actual performance data. [10] We provided
excerpts of our draft statement to USPS for review and comment.

We conducted the work on which this statement is based in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards
require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate
evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on
our audit objectives.

As we previously reported, USPS continues to be in poor financial
condition, as its net losses have totaled $118 billion since it last earned a
positive net income in fiscal year 2006. [11] Beginning in fiscal year 2007,
USPS has recorded consistent net losses in every fiscal year except one,
as shown in Figure 1. From fiscal years 2008 through 2012, revenue
declined before generally increasing through fiscal year 2025. USPS’s
expenses, including personnel-related expenses which are more than
three-quarters of the total, fluctuated year to year but generally increased
from fiscal years 2007 through 2025. In spite of these billions of dollars in
annual net losses, USPS has maintained enough cash reserves and
short-term investments—approximately $15 billion at the end of fiscal
year 2025—to continue operations. [12] It has done so in part by not making

9 United States Postal Service, Office of Inspector _General, Effectiveness of the New_
_Regional Processing and Distribution Center in Richmond, Virginia_, 23-161-1-R24
(Arlington, VA: March 28, 2024); _Effectiveness of the New Regional Processing and_
_Distribution Center in Atlanta, GA,_ 24-074-R24 (Arlington, VA: Aug. 28, 2024); _Delivering_
_for America: First_ ‑ _Class Mail and Priority Mail Service Performance Update_, 25-028-R25
(Arlington, VA: May 7, 2025 _); The OIG's Oversight of the U.S. Postal Service's Delivering_
_for America Plan, Volume 3,_ 25-107-R26 (Arlington, VA: Jan. 20, 2026), _Network_
_Changes: Effectiveness of the New Regional Processing and Distribution Center in_
_Indianapolis, IN_, 25-093-R26 (Arlington, VA: Feb. 2, 2026); and Postal Regulatory
Commission, _Operational and Service Standard Changes Related to the Delivering for_
_America Plan_, Docket N2024-1 (Washington, D.C.: January 31, 2025).

10 U.S. Postal Service, _Fiscal Year 2025 Annual Report to Congress;_ and United States
Postal Service, Office of Inspector General, 25-028-R25.

11 [GAO-26-107366. This figure includes USPS’s net losses from fiscal year 2007 through](http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-26-107366)
fiscal year 2025. USPS’s total net losses do not include the $57 billion noncash positive
financial impact from the Postal Service Reform Act of 2022. which resulted in a positive
net income in fiscal year 2022 due to this change.

12 The short-term investments are $14.1 billion including cash and cash equivalents ($4.6
billion) and short-term investments in U.S. Treasury securities ($9.5 billion).

payments or making partial payments for retiree health and pension
benefits. [13] The Postmaster General has stated that USPS could run out of

cash in early 2027.

**Figure 1: U.S. Postal Service (USPS) Total Expenses and Total Revenue, Fiscal Years 2007-2025**

Regarding its revenue, USPS earned about $29 billion more from fiscal
years 2021 through 2025 than was projected in its 2021 strategic plan.
USPS attributed its higher-than-projected revenues to a combination of
higher prices and higher-than-expected mail volume, resulting from the
implementation of its strategic plan. From November 2020 to July 2025,
USPS increased market-dominant mail prices eight times and increased
competitive mail prices five times. [14] Additionally, USPS delivered about 2
billion more mail pieces than projected for fiscal year 2025. [15] However,

13 Another potential source of liquidity is borrowing capacity, which by statute, allows
USPS to borrow up to $15 billion from the U.S. Treasury. USPS has borrowed that full
amount and the remaining borrowing capacity was zero as of September 30, 2025.

14 This total does not include time-limited price increases for USPS domestic shipping.

15 [U.S. Postal Service, Fiscal Year 2025 Integrated Financial Plan and GAO-26-107366.](http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-26-107366)

despite better than projected volumes, there has been a continuing
decline in First-Class Mail volume, which is USPS’s most profitable
product. [16] USPS reported that First-Class Mail and Marketing Mail
volumes have declined 50 percent between 2007 and 2025, resulting in a
drop of pieces of mail delivered per day per delivery point from 5.5 in
2007 to 2.4 in 2025. [17] In addition, USPS faces an increasingly competitive
package delivery market.

While USPS’s revenue exceeded projections, so did its expenses.
USPS’s total expenses increased by about 10 percent from about $82.4
billion in fiscal year 2020, the year before USPS’s original strategic plan
was introduced, to about $90 billion in fiscal year 2025. [18] USPS attributed
these higher-than-expected expenses to, among other things, higherthan-expected inflation and the noncash impact of its workers’
compensation expense.

In addition, USPS’s long-term unfunded liabilities, mostly for retiree health
and pension benefits and debt, are a significant financial burden for
USPS. As an entity that is intended to be self-sufficient, USPS is
supposed to fund these benefits out of its own revenues. However, since
2012, USPS has either not made, or only partially made, its required
annual funding payments towards these liabilities, contributing to
substantial growth in USPS’s unfunded benefit liabilities. [19] USPS also
increased its debt to the U.S. Treasury from $14 billion in fiscal year 2020
to its statutory maximum of $15 billion by the end of fiscal year 2025.

16 GAO-25-107743.

17 Marketing Mail is a separate category that accounts for commercial and other bulk mail.
This information is reported in the U.S. Postal Service Form 10-K for fiscal year 2025.
USPS files a 10-K report each year that includes a Statement of Operations and a
Balance Sheet determined in accordance with applicable accounting standards. The per
piece calculation reflects the pieces of mail delivered per delivery point, per day.

18 The about 10 percent increase in USPS’s total expenses from fiscal year 2020 through
fiscal year 2025 does not fully reflect USPS’s operational performance in controlling
expenses over this period due to certain non-cash components of workers compensation
expenses. These non-cash components of USPS’s workers’ compensation expense are
highly variable as they are a result of actuarial and discount (or interest) rate changes and
are not directly tied to its operations. Additionally, the Postal Service Reform Act of 2022
changed USPS’s reporting of its retiree health benefits expenses in a way that affects the
comparability of USPS expense over the period from fiscal year 2020 through fiscal year
2024.

19 USPS’s benefits liabilities include pensions benefits, retiree health benefits, and workers
compensation. An unfunded liability measures the difference between a program’s
actuarial accrued liabilities and its assets.

These factors have contributed to USPS’s unfunded benefit liabilities and
debt increasing from 82 percent of USPS revenues at the end of fiscal
year 2007 to 204 percent of revenues at the end of fiscal year 2025.
USPS’s total unfunded benefit liabilities and debt were $166 billion at the
end of fiscal year 2025. [20]

As we reported in December 2025, while USPS’s unfunded benefit
liabilities will likely grow, USPS’s unfunded liability for retiree health
benefits is of particular concern as future benefits are still being accrued
by current employees, while only minimal amounts of additional funding
are projected to go into the Postal Service Retiree Health Benefits Fund. [21]
The Office of Personnel Management (OPM) estimates the first required
USPS payment into the fund, in fiscal year 2026, to be about $750 million.
We project that USPS’s unfunded liability for retiree health benefits will be
about $58.1 billion at the end of fiscal year 2031, after the fund has been
depleted. OPM estimates that USPS will have to pay about $6 billion in
retiree health care premiums per fiscal year out of its operating revenues
when the fund is depleted if nothing is changed. [22]

20 The total of USPS’s workers’ compensation, retiree health and pension unfunded
liabilities and debt decreased from fiscal years 2021 to 2022. This decrease was mainly
due to provisions in the Postal Service Reform Act of 2022, which, among other things,
reduced USPS’s unfunded retiree health care liability by $61 billion via the integration of
postal retiree health care benefits with Medicare.

21 The USPS’s share of retiree health benefit premiums is paid from the Postal Service
Retiree Health Benefits Fund. Since USPS did not make required prefunding payments
from 2012 through 2021 and has not been required to make such payments since 2022,
this fund’s balance has been steadily declining. Starting no later than the end of fiscal year
2026, USPS is required to pay into the Postal Service Retiree Health Benefits Fund
amounts known as “top-up” payments, which OPM estimates will start at about $750
[million in fiscal year 2026. See GAO-26-107336 for more information about these required](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-26-107336)
payments.

22 [For additional information on this topic, see GAO-26-107336.](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-26-107336)

#### USPS Has Taken Several Actions to Improve Its Financial Condition, but Congressional Action Is Needed

###### USPS Has Taken Several Actions to Increase Revenue and Reduce Expenses

In 2021, USPS introduced _Delivering for America_, its 10-year strategic
plan to achieve financial self-sufficiency while continuing to meet its
statutory obligations. USPS stated that the plan seeks to modernize its
network, meet a changing marketplace, and prompt changes from
Congress. Since the introduction of the strategic plan, USPS has taken
many actions, including [23] :

**Raising prices.** The Postal Regulatory Commission gave USPS new
pricing authority in November 2020. [24] Since then, USPS has raised
prices on market dominant products (such as First-Class Mail) eight
times, increasing the cost of a First-Class Mail postage stamp from 55

23 GAO-26-107336.

24 The Postal Regulatory Commission is an independent establishment of the executive
branch that regulates USPS. The Postal Regulatory Commission makes annual
determinations on how well USPS is complying with mail delivery standards and postal
rate requirements. When the 2006 Postal Accountability and Enhancement Act limited
postal price increases it included a provision for the Postal Regulatory Commission to
evaluate the price cap system 10 years after enactment and modify it if necessary to meet
the objectives of the law. Following the Postal Regulatory Commission’s December 2017
evaluation, in November 2020 it announced new rules on prices for market-dominant
postal products. The Postal Regulatory Commission allowed USPS to increase its prices
beyond consumer price index increases and account for additional costs incurred. As a
result, USPS could now base rate increases on factors including (1) decreased mail
density (increasing the cost-per-piece of mail), and (2) raising revenue to meet its required
payments for retirement-related obligations.

cents in fiscal year 2020, to 78 cents in fiscal year 2025 (about 42
percent). [25]

- **Realigning its transportation network.** USPS aimed to reduce
expenses and improve efficiency by implementing new mail
transportation strategies. In its strategic plan, USPS stated these
strategies included facilitating the efficient movement of full trucks,
which resulted in fewer transportation trips, and moving mail volume
from air to ground routes to save money. As a result of these
changes, USPS reported collectively saving over $1 billion annually
between fiscal years 2023 and 2024. [26] These strategies include
USPS’s Regional Transportation Optimization (RTO) initiative, which
we discuss later in this statement.

- **Redesigning its mail and package processing operations.** USPS
is redesigning its processing network (i.e., its network of facilities to
receive, sort, and transport mail between its origin and destination)
and has begun to make significant capital investments in its
processing facilities. According to USPS, these changes and capital
investments are designed to reduce costs and increase revenues by
improving USPS’s operational efficiency.

**Introducing new products.** USPS has offered new shipping products
with the aim of competing more effectively in the package delivery
business and generating more revenue to fund operations. The most

25 Market dominant products are those for which USPS exercises sufficient market power
that it can effectively increase costs, decrease quality, or decrease output without losing a
significant level of business to competitors. _See_ 39 U.S.C. § 3642. Market dominant
products include those that have no direct alternative, such as First-Class Mail, Marketing
Mail, and Periodicals. A First-Class Mail postage stamp cost 55 cents in November 2020,
and cost 78 cents by the end of fiscal year 2025. The cumulative rate of inflation in the
U.S. over that period was about 21 percent, based on the Consumer Price Index from the
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. According to USPS officials, the
increased prices are needed to generate enough revenue to cover costs and produce
retained earnings, and prior to receiving the new pricing authority they were unable to do
that. According to USPS, the price increases have helped generate more revenue, but
they are only expected to partially offset the effect of declining mail volume, growing
delivery points, and other increasing costs not reflected in the consumer price index.

26 USPS’s total transportation expense was about $8.4 billion in fiscal year 2025, about 10
percent of its total expenses of about $90 billion.

prominent new product is Ground Advantage, which USPS introduced
in July 2023. [27]

**Beginning to make partial payments toward its unfunded**
**pension liability.** From 2014 through 2021, USPS did not make its
required annual amortization payments to OPM for its two pension
programs. [28] Since 2022, USPS has been making partial payments
towards its Federal Employee Retirement System (FERS) pension
benefit liability. [29] USPS has not made any payments towards its
unfunded Civil Service Retirement System (CSRS) pension benefit
liability for a total of $20.1 billion in missed payments from fiscal years
2017 to 2025. According to USPS, this is because it cannot make
these payments and still meet its statutory obligations to provide
postal services throughout the nation. [30]

USPS has faced challenges in taking some of these actions, including
implementing the redesign of its processing and delivery network. For
example, the USPS OIG found that when USPS launched its first new
regional facility and implemented its new surface transportation network
in Richmond, VA, in October 2023, USPS experienced significant service
performance problems that did not abate fully even after the peak holiday
mail season concluded. [31] The OIG found similar issues after USPS

launched its new regional facility in Atlanta in February 2024; it also found

27 USPS’s Ground Advantage combines three of its former products into one simplified
ground shipping product. According to USPS, it provides a simple, reliable, and more
affordable way to ship packages weighing up to 70 pounds with delivery in 2 to 5 days
across the continental U.S. It includes insurance, package forwarding, and free package
pickup service.

28 Amortization payments are amounts intended to pay down an unfunded benefit liability
over a set number of years.

29 USPS has authority to increase postage prices to raise revenue to meet its pension and
retiree health benefits liabilities. Postal Regulatory Commission regulations require that
USPS make payments towards these liabilities equal to the revenue it receives from price
increases from such authority. For the FERS system, USPS paid $500 million of its
required $1.6 billion payment in 2022, $600 million of its required $2.1 billion payment in
2023, $1 billion of its required $2.3 billion payment in 2024, and $1.5 billion of its required
$2.2 billion payment in 2025.

30 OPM began invoicing USPS for amortization payments towards its CSRS liability in
2017.

31 United States Postal Service, Office of Inspector General, 23-161-1-R24. The OIG made
10 recommendations to USPS in this report. Recommendations documentation of lessons
learned for use in future facility activations, better alignment of transportation schedules
with local management, and improving communication with the public that might affected
by service delays.

###### Congressional Action Is Needed to Fix USPS’s Unsustainable Business Model

that USPS did not build on lessons learned from the performance
problems at the Richmond facility. [32]

USPS management told the OIG they had developed plans to address
these issues going forward to avoid a repeat of these obstacles when
they launch future regional facilities. However, the OIG reported in
February 2026 that while USPS had some success in launching a new
regional facility in Indianapolis, IN, it has also faced persistent challenges
identified after other regional facility launches. For example, the facility
faced high employee absenteeism and operational difficulties that led to
congestion and lengthy wait times for trucks waiting to unload mail at the
facility. Further, the OIG found that USPS’s process of launching these
facilities incurred greater costs than projected, offsetting anticipated
savings. [33]

Congress has taken some action to help USPS achieve financial viability.
For example, the Postal Service Reform Act of 2022 significantly reduced
USPS’s retiree health liability although a substantial and growing
unfunded liability still remains. However, further congressional action is
needed soon to fix USPS’s unsustainable business model. As we have
noted above, USPS could run out of cash as soon as fiscal year 2027,
and USPS will be responsible for billions in new annual expenses for
retiree health care, likely in 2031.

We have previously reported that actions USPS could take under its own
authority are likely to be insufficient to fully address its financial
situation. [34] USPS has stated that its actions alone will not result in it

becoming financially self-sufficient. [35] We have previously suggested that
Congress consider various options in the past. [36] While Congress has
taken some actions to address the matters we previously identified; other

32 United States Postal Service, Office of Inspector General, 24-074-R24. The OIG made
seven recommendations to USPS. Recommendations included working with the labor
unions to successfully staff future facilities and improving management training.

33 United States Postal Service, Office of Inspector General, 25-093-R26. The OIG made
seven recommendations to USPS in this report. Recommendations included a plan to
stabilize leadership at the facility, staffing facility management positions to authorized
levels, and strengthening controls over scanning, among others.

34 GAO-17-404T and GAO-20-385.

35 GAO-26-107336.

36 GAO-26-107336.

matters we have made for congressional consideration remain open.
Specifically:

In 2020, we stated that Congress should consider reassessing and
determining: (1) the level of postal services the nation requires, (2) the
extent to which USPS should be financially self-sustaining, and (3) the
appropriate institutional structure for USPS. [37] Congress partially
addressed the first two issues in the Postal Service Reform Act of
2022 by codifying the requirement that USPS generally deliver mail at
least 6 days a week, among other things. [38] The act was silent on
USPS’s institutional structure. As of March 2026, at least two bills that
could partially address USPS’s financial issues have been
introduced. [39]

We reported in 2018 that the financial outlook for the Postal Service
Retiree Health Benefits Fund was poor, as USPS had not made any
payments into it since 2010. Therefore, we stated that Congress
should consider passing legislation to put postal retiree health benefits
on a more sustainable financial footing. The Postal Service Reform
Act of 2022 partially addressed this issue by integrating USPS’s
retiree health care plans with Medicare. However, USPS is still
responsible for paying its share of retiree health benefit premiums,
which are currently paid out of the Postal Service Retiree Health
Benefits Fund. OPM estimates that the fund supporting postal retiree
health benefits will be depleted in fiscal year 2031. At that point,
USPS would be required to pay its share of retiree health care
premiums out of its revenues, which OPM estimates to be about $6
billion per year.

37 GAO-20-385.

38 Additionally, the statute includes language granting USPS more flexibility to develop
certain non-postal products and services, and a statement on an integrated delivery
network for packages and other mail. However, the act did not fundamentally reassess the
level of universal postal service the nation requires, which we continue to believe is the
starting point for reexamining USPS’s business model.

39 One bill would require, among other things, that the U.S. Treasury invest a specified
percentage of the Postal Service Retiree Health Benefits Fund in indexed funds. Under
this provision, the U.S. Treasury would have to, to the maximum extent practicable,
ensure that this portion of fund investments replicates the performance of the longest-term
target date asset allocation investment fund established by the Federal Retirement Thrift
[Investment Board. H.R. 3004, 119th Cong. (1st Sess. 2025). See GAO-26-107336 for](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-26-107336)
considerations regarding such an investment approach. Another bill would authorize
USPS to mail alcoholic beverages which could help address USPS’s financial issues. H.R.
3011, 119th Cong. (1st Sess. 2025).

#### USPS’s Service Performance Continues to Fall Despite Lower Service Standards

As we reported in December 2025, we continue to believe that both
USPS and congressional action is necessary, given the magnitude of the
challenges to restoring USPS to financial sustainability. While USPS can
and should continue to act under its own authority to increase revenue
and reduce USPS’s expenses, timely congressional action is also
needed. Specifically, Congress should establish what services it wants
USPS to provide and the extent to which USPS should be self-sustaining.

The USPS OIG reported in May 2025 that balancing service performance
with the need to remain financially viable in a changing market presents a
significant challenge for USPS. To support the ongoing changes to its
processing and delivery network, USPS has made changes in recent
years to its service standards. [40] Specifically, USPS has lowered the
service standard by increasing the number of days for its delivery window.
The OIG reported that even with the additional time allowed for delivery,
USPS has struggled to meet its standards and is delivering fewer mail
pieces on time. [41]

USPS sets its own service standards for each mail product. These
standards establish how many days it should take for a piece of mail to be
delivered. [42] In fiscal year 2022, USPS revised certain First-Class Mail
service standards, adding up to 2 additional days to its delivery window;
this change expanded the delivery standards from a 1-to-3-day window to
a 1-to-5-day window. According to USPS, this change was intended to
reduce transportation costs by transitioning from air to ground
transportation and to support ongoing Delivering for America plan costcutting initiatives, while improving overall service performance. [43]
However, as shown in Figure 2, USPS has experienced an overall decline
in its on-time performance since it initiated this change.

40 United States Postal Service, Office of Inspector General, 25-028-R25. The OIG made
seven recommendations to USPS in this report. Recommendations included improving
transparency regarding how long service performance might be affected by operational
changes and develop targeted improvement plans for underperforming facilities, among
others.

41 United States Postal Service, Office of Inspector General, 25-028-R25.

42 Service standards vary based on the mail product and the distance from origination to
destination.

43 GAO-26-107657.

**Figure 2: U.S. Postal Service (USPS) Performance Targets and Actual Performance**
**for First** ‑ **Class Mail, Fiscal Years 2021-2025**

As we discussed above, USPS is currently implementing significant
changes to its processing delivery network to address its financial
condition and improve service. However, some of these initiatives—
especially the RTO initiative—have directly affected USPS’s service
standards and performance. The RTO initiative has made significant
changes to how mail enters USPS’s processing and delivery network. [44]

The RTO initiative is intended to optimize transportation between delivery
units and processing facilities at the local and regional levels. [45] To do so,
the RTO initiative aims to reduce the number of trips and mail collections
at USPS facilities located more than 50 miles from selected processing
facilities. Currently, when a customer drops off mail, it is collected at the
delivery unit and processed the same night. However, under the RTO
initiative, some areas will collect and process mail from delivery units the

44 Postal Regulatory Commission, Docket N2024-1; and United States Postal Service,
Office of Inspector General, 25-028-R25.

45 USPS defines a delivery unit as a Post Office, station, branch, or carrier annex that has
mail delivery functions.

next day, adding an extra day to service. USPS has estimated these
changes could save at least $36 billion over the next decade through
reductions in costs for transportation, mail and package processing, and
real estate.

In February 2025, USPS announced a refinement of its service standards
due to the new RTO initiative. [46] This refinement left standards generally
the same but anticipated that some locations could experience slower
mail. For example, the First-Class Mail standard retained its 1-to-5-day
delivery window, but the changes added 1 day to the delivery expectation
for mail and packages sent from a zip code more than 50 miles from a
processing facility. This change means that mail that used to take 3 to 4
days to be delivered could take 4 to 5 days, making delivery slower but
still within the service standard.

USPS has said the RTO initiative’s operational changes will not
disproportionately affect specific populations or areas. [47] However, the
Postal Regulatory Commission has raised concerns that the changes
could do so. In its advisory opinion issued in January 2025, the Postal
Regulatory Commission stated that USPS’s RTO initiative downplayed
the significant adverse effects that it would have on certain mail classes,
and rural communities. [48]

Specifically, in its opinion, the Postal Regulatory Commission noted that
rural communities would experience disproportionate downgrading of
service standards. Additionally, some First-Class Mail (such as individual
letters and postcards, the type of mail most likely to be used by a
household) and 49.5 percent of zip code pairs (which account for origin to
destination of mail) would experience downgraded service. The Postal
Regulatory Commission also raised concerns that USPS likely overstated
the savings these changes would net. [49] USPS disagreed with the
advisory opinion and has continued to implement the RTO initiative. The

46 These adjustments were scheduled to take effect in April and July of 2025 and affect
First-Class Mail, Periodicals, Marketing Mail, Package Services (including Bound Printed
Matter, Media Mail, and Library Mail), USPS Ground Advantage, Priority Mail, and Priority
Mail Express.

47 U.S. Postal Service, U.S. Postal Service Announces Refined Service Standards and
Cost Reductions (Wahington, D.C.: Feb. 26, 2025).

48 Postal Regulatory Commission, Docket N2024-1.

49 Postal Regulatory Commission, Docket N2024-1.

#### GAO Contact and Staff Acknowledgments

OIG recently reported that as of September 2025, USPS had
implemented the initiative in 158 of 165 planned regions. [50]

In closing, recent USPS and congressional actions have reduced some
USPS expenses and increased USPS’s revenue, but these actions
collectively have not restored USPS’s financial self-sufficiency.
Additionally, declines in mail volume and service performance could
further erode USPS’s financial condition. USPS should continue to take
actions to address its condition. Given the current and potential future
state of USPS’s finances, we also believe that Congress should take
action to consider the matters we previously made. This includes fully
addressing the level of postal service the nation requires, the extent to
which USPS should be self-sustaining, and a sustainable financial path
for retiree health benefits.

Chairman Sessions, Ranking Member Mfume, and Members of the
Subcommittee, this completes my prepared statement. I would be
pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time.

If you or your staff have any questions about this testimony, please
contact David Marroni, Director, Physical Infrastructure at
[MarroniD@gao.gov. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional](mailto:MarroniD@gao.gov)
Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this
statement. GAO staff who made key contributions to this testimony are
Frank Todisco (Chief Actuary); Kyle Browning (Assistant Director); Betsey
Ward-Jenks (Analyst in Charge), and Rosa Leung. In addition, Sarah
Green, Gary Guggolz, Greg Hanna, Alexandra Jeszeck, Bonnie Leer,
Thanh Lu, John Shumann, Michael Soressi, Laurel Voloder and Alicia
Wilson. Other staff who made key contributions to the reports cited in the
testimony are identified in the source products.

50 United States Postal Service, Office of Inspector General, 25-107-R26.

This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the
United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety
without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain
copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be
necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately.

##### GAO’s Mission Obtaining Copies of GAO Reports and Testimony

###### Order by Phone

##### Connect with GAO To Report Fraud, Waste, and Abuse in Federal Programs Media Relations Congressional Relations General Inquiries

The Government Accountability Office, the audit, evaluation, and investigative
arm of Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting its constitutional
responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the
federal government for the American people. GAO examines the use of public
funds; evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides analyses,
recommendations, and other assistance to help Congress make informed
oversight, policy, and funding decisions. GAO’s commitment to good government
is reflected in its core values of accountability, integrity, and reliability.

The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is
[through our website. Each weekday afternoon, GAO posts on its website newly](https://www.gao.gov/)
[released reports, testimony, and correspondence. You can also subscribe to](https://www.gao.gov/subscribe/index.php)
GAO’s email updates to receive notification of newly posted products.

The price of each GAO publication reflects GAO’s actual cost of production and
distribution and depends on the number of pages in the publication and whether
the publication is printed in color or black and white. Pricing and ordering
[information is posted on GAO’s website, https://www.gao.gov/ordering.htm.](https://www.gao.gov/ordering.htm)

Place orders by calling (202) 512-6000, toll free (866) 801-7077, or
TDD (202) 512-2537.

Orders may be paid for using American Express, Discover Card, MasterCard,
Visa, check, or money order. Call for additional information.

[Connect with GAO on X, LinkedIn, Instagram, and YouTube.](https://x.com/usgao)
[Subscribe to our Email Updates. Listen to our Podcasts.](https://www.gao.gov/about/contact-us/stay-connected)
Visit GAO on the web at https://www.gao.gov.

Contact FraudNet:

Website: [https://www.gao.gov/about/what-gao-does/fraudnet](https://www.gao.gov/about/what-gao-does/fraudnet)

Automated answering system: (800) 424-5454

Sarah Kaczmarek, Managing Director, Media@gao.gov

David A. Powner, Acting Managing Director, CongRel@gao.gov

[https://www.gao.gov/about/contact-us](https://www.gao.gov/about/contact-us)

Please Print on Recycled Paper.