# Department of Energy: Key Challenges Remain for Developing and Deploying Advanced Energy Technologies to Meet Future Needs

**Report:** GAO-07-106 | **Published:** 2006-12-01 | **Source:** [U.S. Government Accountability Office](https://www.gao.gov/products/gao-07-106)

---

**United States Government Accountability Office**
## GAO Report to Congressional Requesters

**December 2006**

**GAO-07-106**

## DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY Key Challenges Remain for Developing and Deploying Advanced Energy Technologies to Meet Future Needs

**December 2006**

###### DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY **Key Challenges Remain for Developing** **and Deploying Advanced Energy** **Technologies to Meet Future Needs**

**What GAO Found**

DOE’s total budget authority for energy R&D dropped by over 85 percent (in
real terms) from 1978 to 2005, peaking in the late 1970s but falling sharply
when oil prices returned to lower levels in the mid-1980s (see table). DOE’s
R&D efforts have resulted in steady incremental progress in reducing costs
for renewable energy technologies, reducing harmful emissions of coal-fired
power plants, and improving safety and efficiency for nuclear power plants.

Further development and deployment of advanced renewable, fossil, and
nuclear energy technologies face several key challenges. Challenges for
renewable technologies include developing (1) cost-effective technologies to
produce ethanol using agricultural residues and other biomass materials as
well as the infrastructure for distributing ethanol, (2) new wind technologies
to expand into low wind and offshore locations, and (3) improved solar
technologies that can better compete with conventional technologies.
Challenges for fossil technologies are primarily associated with developing
advanced coal gasification technologies to further reduce harmful emissions
and reducing their high capital costs. Challenges for advanced nuclear
technologies include uncertainty about the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission’s revised licensing process, investor concerns about high
capital costs, and the disposal of a legacy of spent nuclear fuel.

Many states have successfully stimulated the deployment of renewable
energy technologies by using standards, mandates, and financial incentives
that require, for example, power companies to provide small producers with
access to the power transmission grid and purchase their excess energy.
Each of the six countries GAO reviewed has used mandates and/or financial
incentives to deploy advanced energy technologies that are providing, or are
expected in the future to provide, significant amounts of energy.

**Budget Authority for Renewable, Fossil, and Nuclear R&D, Fiscal Years 1978-2005**

Note: Budget authority is in real terms, adjusted to fiscal year 2005 dollars to account for inflation.

**United States Government Accountability Office**

#### Contents

**Letter** 1

Results in Brief 5

Background 8
DOE’s Budget Authority for Renewable, Fossil, and Nuclear Energy
R&D Has Declined by over 85 Percent in Real Terms Since 1978;
DOE Is Narrowing Its R&D Focus 11
Advanced Renewable, Fossil, and Nuclear Energy Technologies
Face Key Barriers to Market Deployment 26
The States and Countries We Reviewed Have Implemented a
Variety of Initiatives to Encourage the Development and
Deployment of Energy Technologies 42
Conclusions 53

Recommendation to the Congress 54
Agency Comments 54

**Appendix I** **Estimated Federal Tax Expenditures Targeted at**
**Energy Suppliers and Users, Fiscal Year 2006** 56

**Appendix II** **Scope and Methodology** 58

**Appendix III** **The States’ Use of Renewable Energy Incentives,**
**Standards, and Mandates** 61

**Appendix IV** **Three States’ Initiatives to Stimulate the Use of**
**Renewable Energy Technologies** 63

**Appendix V** **Comments from the Department of Energy** 67

**Appendix VI** **GAO Contact and Staff Acknowledgments** 68

**Page i** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

**Tables**

**Figures**

Table 1: Comparison of Conventional Pulverized Coal and IGCC
Technologies 21
Table 2: Comparison of Electricity Generating Costs Using Nuclear,
Coal, and Natural Gas Energy Sources 38
Table 3: Comparison of Electricity Generating Costs Assuming a
Carbon Emissions Tax 39

Figure 1: Comparison of the U.S. Energy Portfolio in 1973 and 2004 9
Figure 2: Projected U.S. Electricity Generation by Energy Source,
2005-2030 10
Figure 3: DOE’s Budget Authority for Renewable, Fossil, and
Nuclear R&D, Fiscal Years 1978 through 2005 13
Figure 4: DOE’s Budget Authority for Renewable, Fossil, and
Nuclear R&D, Fiscal Year 2006 14
Figure 5: Distribution of State Incentives and Policies for
Renewable Energy 43
Figure 6: Number of States Using Each of 12 Renewable Standards,
Mandates, and Incentives 45

**Abbreviations**

AFCI Advanced Fuel Cycle Initiative
DOE Department of Energy
EIA Energy Information Administration
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
GNEP Global Nuclear Energy Partnership
IGCC integrated gasification combined cycle
MIT Massachusetts Institute of Technology
NRC Nuclear Regulatory Commission
RPS renewable portfolio standards
R&D research and development

This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the
United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further
permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or
other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to
reproduce this material separately.

**Page ii** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

**United States Government Accountability Office**
**Washington, DC 20548**

**December 20, 2006**

**The Honorable Bart Gordon**

**Ranking Member**
**Committee on Science**

**House of Representatives**

**The Honorable Michael M. Honda**

**Ranking Member**
**Subcommittee on Energy**
**Committee on Science**

**House of Representatives**

**Since 1974, the nation has been subjected to periodic disruptions of crude**
**oil imports resulting in price shocks and related energy crises. Oil prices**
**doubled in 1974 and doubled again between 1978 and 1980. These price**
**shocks alerted the nation to our growing dependence on imported oil and**
**the need to conserve energy and develop alternative energy sources. Yet,**
**when world crude oil prices plunged in the mid-1980s, the United States**
**continued to rely on oil, and U.S. energy companies reduced their**
**investments in developing alternative energy technologies. More recently,**
**crude oil prices more than doubled—gasoline prices exceeded $3 per**
**gallon in August 2006—as a result of increased world consumption,**
**hurricanes in the Gulf of Mexico, and instability in the Middle East and**
**other oil producing regions. However, by October 2006, crude oil prices**
**had once again declined, though at higher levels than previously. Despite**
**these periodic price shocks and related energy crises, the United States’**
**dependence on imported crude oil and natural gas continues to increase—**
**crude oil imports have grown from 40.5 percent of the U.S. supply in 1980**
**to 65.5 percent of the U.S. supply in 2005, according to the Energy**
**Information Administration (EIA), within the Department of Energy**
**(DOE). Without dramatic change, the United States is likely to become**
**ever more reliant on imported oil and natural gas with all the attendant**
**threats to the U.S. economy and national security.**

**EIA projects that total U.S. energy demand will increase by about 28 to 35**
**percent between 2005 and 2030. Specific sectors reflect even more**
**dramatic growth in energy demand: (1) the transportation sector is**
**expected to grow by 43 percent, with annual crude oil consumption**
**increasing from about 4.8 billion barrels in 2004 to about 6.8 billion barrels**
**by 2030 (a barrel of oil is equivalent to 42 gallons of gasoline), and (2) the**

**Page 1** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

electricity sector is expected to grow by 50 percent, with electricity
consumption increasing from about 3.6 billion megawatt-hours in 2004 to
about 5.3 billion megawatt-hours by 2030 (a megawatt-hour is sufficient to
meet the demand of 750 households for 1 hour). EIA projects that the
proportions of energy derived from renewable, fossil, and nuclear sources
for both transportation and electricity generation will remain about the
same through 2030.

Since its creation in 1977, DOE has had leadership responsibility for
energy research, development, and demonstration programs (R&D) to
enable the nation to deploy advanced energy technologies for meeting
future demands and diversifying its energy portfolio. 1 During the past 29

future demands and diversifying its energy portfolio. 1 During the past 29

years, the Congress has provided DOE about $50 billion for R&D in
renewable, fossil, and nuclear energy technologies. 2 Specifically:

2 Specifically:

DOE’s renewable energy R&D program has primarily focused on (1)
developing cost-effective technologies for producing ethanol from biomass
sources, such as agricultural residues and forest waste, and (2) making
wind and solar energy technologies more cost-competitive sources of
electricity. DOE has also funded R&D for geothermal and hydropower
energy technologies and, in 2003, accelerated the R&D funding for
developing hydrogen technologies.

DOE’s fossil energy R&D program has primarily focused on reducing
emissions of harmful pollutants from coal-fired power plants, particularly
sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide in the 1980s and early 1990s. More
recently, DOE has concentrated on developing (1) coal gasification
technologies to improve efficiency and reduce mercury and carbon
dioxide emissions and (2) sequestration technologies for the long-term
storage of carbon dioxide.

DOE’s nuclear energy R&D program has focused primarily on improving
nuclear power plant safety—in response to the March 1979 accident at the
Three Mile Island plant near Harrisburg, Pennsylvania—and efficiency. 3

1 DOE is also responsible for energy efficiency programs, which are integral to addressing
future energy challenges by reducing demand.

2 All historical DOE R&D budget authority totals are presented in real terms by adjusting
them to fiscal year 2005 dollars to account for inflation.

3 The Three Mile Island accident, which involved one of the plant’s two reactors, was the
most serious incident at a U.S. commercial nuclear power plant. While there were no
deaths or injuries, the reactor’s core began to melt down, creating widespread concern
about health and safety.

**Page 2** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

More recently, the program has focused on developing technologies and
designs for new generations of nuclear reactors —so-called Generation III
and Generation IV. Beginning in October 2007, electric power companies
are expected to apply for the first licenses to construct nuclear reactors
since 1979. These reactors will use Generation III technologies. DOE’s
nuclear R&D program is developing Generation IV technologies for
deployment after 2020.

The market has been slow to embrace advanced energy technologies
because they typically are not economically competitive with conventional
energy sources such as oil, natural gas, and coal. In part this is because the
prices U.S. consumers pay for conventional energy do not reflect their true
costs, including the costs of certain adverse environmental impacts;
economists refer to these hidden costs as negative externalities. For
example, we continue to rely on electricity generated from coal-fired
plants because coal is plentiful and inexpensive in the United States.
However, carbon dioxide emissions from coal-fired power plants—a key
concern for global warming—are not currently regulated, and thus
potential environmental costs associated with global warming are not
reflected in the electricity prices that consumers pay. In contrast,
renewable energy sources, such as wind farms, and nuclear reactors do
not produce carbon dioxide emissions in generating electricity.

The American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 stimulated the deployment of
ethanol by providing a 51-cent tax credit through December 31, 2010, for
every gallon of ethanol blended into gasoline. 4 The act also provides tax

every gallon of ethanol blended into gasoline. 4 The act also provides tax

credits that expire on December 31, 2006, for every gallon of biodiesel and
agri-biodiesel. Similarly, the Energy Policy Act of 2005 promoted a
diversified U.S. energy portfolio by reauthorizing DOE’s R&D funding and
providing tax incentives for stimulating investment in advanced
renewable, fossil, and nuclear energy technologies. 5 Specifically, the

renewable, fossil, and nuclear energy technologies. 5 Specifically, the

Energy Policy Act of 2005 extended the production tax credit established
in the Energy Policy Act of 1992 for renewable technologies for 2 years
until January 1, 2008. The act also added a new (1) investment tax credit of
up to $1.3 billion for constructing new clean-coal power plants and (2)
production tax credit of 1.8 cents per kilowatt-hour for up to 6,000
megawatts of new nuclear power capacity lasting 8 years after each
qualifying nuclear reactor begins service. These tax credits and other tax

4 Pub. L. No. 108-357.

5 Pub. L. No. 109-58.

**Page 3** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

incentives are legally known as tax expenditures; 6 revenue losses from

these tax incentives can be viewed as spending channeled through the tax
system. Historically, the tax subsidies that the U.S. government has
provided to the energy sector have been directed toward the conventional
energy sector. More recently, tax incentives available in fiscal year 2006,
such as the new technology tax credits, have also been directed toward
stimulating the development and deployment of advanced energy
technologies (see app. I).

You asked that we assess the nation’s ability to meet its energy needs
through 2030 by examining DOE’s efforts to diversify the nation’s energy
portfolio and reduce its dependence on oil and natural gas. Specifically,
we examined (1) DOE’s R&D funding trends and strategies for developing
advanced renewable, fossil, and nuclear energy technologies; (2) the key
barriers to developing and deploying technologies that will address the
nation’s future energy needs; and (3) the efforts of states and selected
countries to develop and deploy renewable, fossil, and nuclear energy
technologies that address future energy needs.

To ensure that we obtained a balanced view of future U.S. energy
challenges, we reviewed documents and interviewed DOE officials,
including program managers and laboratory scientists; senior industry
executives; independent experts; officials of several state governments
and states’ associations; and representatives of foreign governments and
industry associations. More specifically, to review DOE’s R&D funding
trends and strategy for developing advanced energy technologies, we
analyzed DOE’s (1) budget authority data for renewable, fossil, and
nuclear energy R&D from fiscal year 1978 through fiscal year 2006,
adjusted for any advanced appropriations and rescissions, and (2)
strategic plans for developing and deploying new energy technologies. For
perspective, we also reviewed revenue losses due to energy-related tax
expenditures for fiscal years 2000 through 2006. To assess the key
technological, economic, and other barriers, we analyzed various energy
studies and interviewed senior officials at DOE and the Nuclear

Regulatory Commission (NRC), which regulates the construction and
operations of nuclear power plants, industry executives, and independent
experts. To examine the efforts of states and selected countries to develop

6 Tax expenditures result in forgone revenue for the federal government due to preferential
provisions in the tax code. See GAO _, Government Performance and Accountability: Tax_
_Expenditures Represent a Substantial Federal Commitment and Need to Be Reexamined_,
[GAO-05-690 (Washington, D.C.: Sept. 23, 2005).](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-05-690)

**Page 4** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

Results in Brief

and deploy advanced energy technologies, we identified their use of
mandates, financial incentives, and other actions. We selected Brazil,
Denmark, France, Germany, Japan, and Spain because they have initiated
major nationwide programs to stimulate the deployment of advanced
energy technologies that have changed, or could change, their energy
portfolios. We found that the data we used to examine trends and states’
efforts to develop and deploy energy technologies to be sufficiently
reliable for our purposes. We conducted our work from October 2005
through October 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. (See app. II for further information about our scope
and methodology.)

Despite growing dependence on foreign energy sources, DOE’s R&D
budget authority for renewable, fossil, and nuclear energy technologies
declined by over 85 percent (in real terms) between fiscal years 1978 and
2005. Specifically, DOE’s R&D budget authority dropped from about $5.5
billion (in real terms) in fiscal year 1978 to $793 million in fiscal year 2005.
Budget authority for renewable, fossil, and nuclear energy R&D peaked in
the late 1970s before falling sharply in the mid 1980s when crude oil prices
returned to lower levels. As funding has shrunk, DOE’s R&D focus has
narrowed. For example, DOE’s renewable R&D program has focused on
ethanol, wind, and solar technologies, making steady incremental progress
in reducing their costs over the past 29 years. DOE’s fossil R&D program
has focused primarily on reducing harmful emissions of coal-fired power
plants, working with industry to make significant progress in reducing
sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide pollution during the 1980s and 1990s.
Currently, DOE is using coal gasification technologies to reduce mercury
and carbon dioxide emissions and achieve the long-term goal of a “nearzero emissions” power plant. From 1978 through 1998, DOE’s nuclear R&D
program focused on making incremental improvements in nuclear power
plant safety and efficiency. Since 1998, DOE’s nuclear R&D program
shifted its focus to developing “next generation” nuclear facilities for
reprocessing spent fuel, developing advanced nuclear reactors that
produce hydrogen and reduce waste, and producing more efficient nuclear
fuels. Faced with competing R&D priorities and budget constraints, DOE’s
fiscal year 2007 budget proposed eliminating R&D funding for its
geothermal, hydropower, oil, and natural gas programs.

Advanced renewable, fossil, and nuclear energy technologies all face key
barriers to their development and deployment. Among renewable energy
technologies, for ethanol to garner a significant share of the U.S. gasoline
market, ethanol producers need to deploy cost-competitive technologies

**Page 5** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

for processing agricultural residues and other biomass materials; it is
unclear whether ethanol from corn alone can achieve this result.

Widespread deployment of ethanol also faces infrastructure challenges—
in particular, transporting and storing ethanol and retrofitting gasoline
station pumps. Barriers to electricity generation from renewable
sources—primarily wind and solar—include the difficulty of efficiently
converting renewable energy into electricity, high up-front capital costs,
including connection to the electric power transmission grid; the
intermittent nature of wind and solar energy; and the higher financial risks
associated with gaps in the renewal of the production tax credit. In
addition, renewable energy technologies must compete with traditional
fossil energy sources whose greater environmental costs are not reflected
in the price paid by consumers, and renewable energy R&D budgets have
been subject to growing congressional earmarks in recent years. For
advanced fossil technologies, the primary challenge continues to be
controlling emissions of mercury and carbon dioxide generated by
conventional coal-fired plants. However, reducing these emissions
requires plants to use new coal gasification technologies, which cost about
20 percent more to construct than conventional coal-fired plants and carry
higher perceived investment risk as new technologies. Furthermore, DOE
and industry have not demonstrated the technological feasibility of the
long-term storage of carbon dioxide captured by a large-scale, coal-based
power plant. For advanced nuclear technologies, investors face
uncertainties about whether NRC’s revised review process for new
reactors will effectively reduce regulatory delays and minimize added
costs to address safety concerns. While public opposition previously was a
primary barrier, the nuclear industry reports that public opinion,
particularly in the southeast United States, is more favorable reflecting the
increased demand for electricity, perceived advances in safety, and
growing concerns about global warming. Investors also face higher
financial risk because of nuclear reactors’ high capital costs and long
construction time frames, as well as environmental and nonproliferation
concerns about spent nuclear fuel.

While federal R&D has declined and the government has relied on the
market to determine whether to deploy advanced energy technologies,
many states have assumed higher profile roles by enacting standards,
mandates, and financial incentives primarily to stimulate renewable
energy technologies that address their growing energy needs and
environmental concerns. In particular, 22 states have established
renewable portfolio standards requiring or encouraging that a fixed
percentage of the state’s electricity be generated from renewable sources;
39 states have established rules for electric power companies to connect

**Page 6** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

renewable energy sources to the power transmission grid and credit
producers for excess generation; and 45 states offer tax credits, grants, or
loans to stimulate the deployment of renewable energy. Examples of state
initiatives include the following: Since 1980, Minnesota has enacted
various mandates and production incentives to stimulate the use of
ethanol. Minnesota had displaced nearly 10 percent of all of its gasoline
consumption with ethanol by June 2006 and had nearly one-third of the
nation’s ethanol fueling stations in September 2006. Texas’ 2005 legislation
extended the state’s 1999 renewable portfolio standard to require the
installation of 5,000 megawatts of new renewable capacity by 2015. As of
September 2006, electric power companies had installed over 1,900
megawatts of new renewable capacity in Texas—approximately 3 percent
of its total electricity consumption. California’s Solar Initiative called for
3,000 megawatts of new solar capacity by 2017. In response, 150
megawatts of new solar capacity have recently been installed. Some states
have also established mandates and financial incentives to stimulate

advanced fossil and nuclear technologies. For example, 2002 legislation in
Indiana established investment tax credits for advanced coal power plants
to encourage cleaner coal technologies. Similarly, Calvert County,
Maryland, recently offered a 50-percent, 15-year property tax credit to the
owner of the Calvert Cliffs nuclear power plant if an additional nuclear
reactor is built.

Each of the six countries we reviewed—Brazil, Denmark, Germany, Japan,
Spain, and France—has sustained long-term efforts using mandates and/or
incentives to deploy advanced energy technologies that are providing, or
are expected in the future to provide, significant amounts of energy. For
example, by 2005, Brazil had eliminated its need to import crude oil for
gasoline by using mandates and price subsidies to stimulate the
development of an ethanol industry that uses domestic sugarcane.
Similarly, Denmark’s stimulation of renewable energy has resulted in wind
energy generating 19 percent of total electricity consumed in 2005.
Denmark’s support of wind energy has also created a thriving domestic
wind turbine industry, which grew from about 200 megawatts to more
than 3,000 megawatts in annual global sales over the past decade. To
develop a sustainable energy supply and protect the environment,
Germany established a goal to increase the share of renewable energy
consumption to at least 4.2 percent of its total energy requirements by
2010 and to 10 percent by 2020. The 2010 target was exceeded in 2005,
when renewable technologies accounted for 4.6 percent of consumption.
To reduce its reliance on imported energy, Japan initiated a 10-year
program subsidizing the cost of residential solar systems. As a result, solar
systems were installed on more than 253,000 homes and the price of

**Page 7** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

Background

residential solar systems was cut by more than one-half. Spain, supported
in part by a European Union program to promote cleaner energy
technologies, is successfully operating a 320-megawatt coal gasification
plant—the largest such plant in the world—designed to run more
efficiently with fewer emissions than conventional coal-fired plants.
France leads the United States in deploying an advanced Generation III
nuclear reactor—the European Pressurized Reactor—which is designed to
be safer, more efficient, and less susceptible to terrorist attacks than older
reactors, and will also generate nearly 80 percent more electricity.

To meet the nation’s rising demand for energy, reduce its economic and
national security vulnerability to crude oil supply disruptions, and
minimize adverse environmental effects, we suggest that the Congress
consider further stimulating the development and deployment of a
diversified energy portfolio by focusing R&D funding on advanced energy
technologies.

For the past several decades, the United States has enjoyed relatively
inexpensive and plentiful energy supplies, relying on market forces to
determine the energy mix that provides the most reliable and least
expensive sources of energy—primarily oil, natural gas, and coal. In 1973,
oil cost about $15 per barrel (in real terms) and accounted for 96 percent
of the energy used in the transportation sector and 17 percent of the
energy used to generate electricity.

In 1973, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries
embargoed nations that it believed supported Israel during the Yom
Kippur War. The disruption of oil supplies caused oil prices in the United
States to double between 1973 and 1974, resulting in long gasoline lines
and rationing by the U.S. government. Natural gas price spikes followed a
pattern similar to that of oil. Since oil and natural gas accounted for about
35 percent of electricity generation in 1973, electricity prices soared, and
consumers experienced periodic brown outs. Oil disruptions reoccurred
with the 1979 Iranian Revolution and the 1979 to 1981 Iran-Iraq War, which
caused oil prices to double once again from the already record-high prices,
adversely affecting the U.S. economy. Oil and natural gas prices fell in the
mid-1980s, and U.S. reliance on fossil fuels and, in particular on imported
oil, continued as the U.S. economy expanded and domestic sources of oil
declined. By 2004, about 63 percent of U.S. oil was imported and cost $38

**Page 8** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

per barrel (in real terms); 7 oil accounted for 98 percent of energy

consumed for transportation, and coal and natural gas accounted for
about 71 percent of the energy used to generate electricity.

As shown in figure 1, the current U.S. energy portfolio is similar to the
energy portfolio in 1973. The primary change is the growth of the fledgling
nuclear energy industry during the 1970s and 1980s, as new nuclear power
plants came online and efficiency improved. However, because nuclear
power plants currently operate at about 90 percent capacity, new growth
will occur only when new reactors are built. In addition, while hydropower
makes up the bulk of energy generated from renewable sources, its share
of the renewable energy has declined because new wind, geothermal, and
solar-generating capacity has been added while hydropower generation
has remained unchanged.

**Figure 1: Comparison of the U.S. Energy Portfolio in 1973 and 2004**

**1973** **2004**

**1%**

Nuclear energy

Renewable energy

Fossil energy

Source: GAO analysis of EIA data.

7 In 2006, crude oil prices peaked at nearly $70 per barrel in the United States.

**Page 9** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

EIA’s model of energy generation in 2030 projects that the United States
will continue to primarily rely on oil to provide most of the energy in the
transportation sector and coal to provide most of the energy for generating
electricity. EIA projects that U.S. electricity generation will grow from
3,900 billion kilowatt-hours in 2005 to 5,500 billion kilowatt-hours in 2030
(see fig. 2).

**Figure 2: Projected U.S. Electricity Generation by Energy Source, 2005-2030**

**Billions of kilowatt-hours**

**3,500**

Source: EIA.

Note: EIA projects a greater reliance on coal to generate electricity if oil prices exceed $90 per barrel
by 2030 and less reliance on coal and a slight reduction in renewable energy if oil prices are less than
$30 per barrel by 2030.

In addition to funding energy R&D to develop advanced energy
technologies, DOE has funded efforts to improve energy efficiency and
reduce energy demand. For example, DOE has encouraged energy
efficiency by, for example, establishing energy efficiency standards for
home appliances and air conditioners, and the federal government
provides tax credits for purchasing energy-efficient equipment.

**Page 10** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

DOE’s Budget
Authority for
Renewable, Fossil,
and Nuclear Energy
R&D Has Declined by
over 85 Percent in

Real Terms Since
1978; DOE Is
Narrowing Its R&D
Focus

The federal government also provides the energy industry and consumers
with 23 tax expenditures affecting energy supply, some of which are
incentives designed to stimulate the development and deployment of
advanced technologies. From a budgetary perspective, most tax
expenditures are comparable to mandatory spending for entitlement
programs because they require no further action. Tax expenditures do not
compete directly in the annual budget process and, in effect, receive a
higher funding priority than discretionary spending subject to the annual
appropriations process. Some tax expenditures are enacted on a
temporary basis, providing an opportunity for scrutiny before they can be
extended.

Currently, the United States does not regulate carbon dioxide emissions,
which contribute to global warming. In 1992, the United States ratified the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, which was
intended to stabilize the build-up of greenhouse gases, but did not impose
binding limits on greenhouse gas emissions. In 1997, the United States
participated in drafting the Kyoto Protocol, which established some limits
on greenhouse gas emissions but did not ratify the protocol. Many DOE
officials and industry executives told us, however, that the federal
government might begin to regulate greenhouse gas emissions in the
future to address global warming concerns. The Energy Policy Act of 2005
authorized R&D funding for the capture and long-term storage—or
sequestration—of carbon dioxide.

DOE’s budget authority for renewable, fossil, and nuclear energy R&D
dropped from $5.5 billion (in real terms) in fiscal year 1978 to $793 million
in fiscal year 2005—a decline of over 85 percent. Energy R&D budget
authority peaked in the late 1970s in response to the Organization of Arab
Petroleum Exporting Countries’ oil embargo of 1973 and fell sharply as
crude oil prices plunged in the mid 1980s. However, since fiscal year 2000,
federal support for the energy industry—through DOE’s R&D budget
authority and federal revenue losses from energy-related income tax
expenditures—has grown. Since 1978, DOE’s renewable energy R&D
program has made incremental progress in making renewable
technologies more efficient and reducing their costs. DOE’s fossil energy
R&D program has focused primarily on reducing harmful emissions by
coal-fired power plants. During the 1980s and 1990s, the program made
significant progress in demonstrating technologies that reduce sulfur
dioxide and nitrogen oxide pollutants, and DOE’s current objective is to
develop a “near-zero emissions” power plant by targeting mercury and
carbon dioxide emissions. In response to the Three Mile Island accident in

**Page 11** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

DOE’s Budget Authority
for Renewable, Fossil, and
Nuclear Energy R&D Has
Substantially Fallen Since
1978

1979, DOE’s nuclear energy R&D program focused on improving the safety
and efficiency of nuclear reactors. More recently, the nuclear energy R&D
program has given priority to (1) encouraging electric power companies to
submit the first applications to NRC in over 30 years for combined licenses
to build and operate a nuclear reactor to generate electricity, (2)
developing technologies for reprocessing spent nuclear fuel that minimize
the threat of spent fuel being used to make nuclear weapons and reduce
highly radioactive waste, and (3) developing advanced Generation IV
reactor technologies. Faced with competing R&D priorities and budget
constraints, DOE has proposed in recent years to concentrate its R&D
funding on key technologies for meeting the nation’s growing energy
demand while eliminating funding for geothermal, hydropower, oil, and
natural gas technologies.

As shown in figure 3, renewable, fossil, and nuclear energy R&D budget
authority each peaked in the late 1970s before falling sharply in the 1980s.
Similarly, energy R&D funding as a percentage of total nondefense R&D
expenditures fell from about 20 percent in the late 1970s to less than 5
percent in fiscal year 2006, according to the American Association for the
Advancement of Science. More recently, total budget authority for the
three energy R&D programs has risen after bottoming out in fiscal year
1998. Budget authority for renewable energy R&D peaked at $1.5 billion
(in real terms) in fiscal year 1979, with most of the funding directed
toward solar energy. Subsequently, renewable R&D budget authority fell,
hitting its lowest point of $144 million (in real terms) in 1990. Fossil energy
R&D budget authority peaked at $1.9 billion (in real terms) in fiscal year
1979 and then has fluctuated. In particular, the Clean Coal Technology
Program, a joint DOE-industry effort to demonstrate technologies that
reduce sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide emissions, began in 1985 with
high levels of DOE budget authority in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
Fossil energy R&D budget authority rose in fiscal year 2001, and the
administration introduced its “clear skies” initiative to further reduce
pollution in fiscal year 2002. DOE’s nuclear energy R&D program peaked
at $2.4 billion (in real terms) in fiscal year 1978 and then fell through fiscal
year 1998, when the nuclear R&D program received no budget authority.
Since fiscal year 1998, budget authority for nuclear energy R&D has
gradually increased. Similar to DOE’s budget authority for energy R&D,
estimated federal revenue losses from energy-related tax expenditures
grew from nearly $2.2 billion (in real terms) in fiscal year 2000 to nearly

**Page 12** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

$4.9 billion in fiscal year 2005. 8 While many of the new tax expenditures

are for developing and deploying advanced energy technologies, tax
expenditures for conventional energy remain among the largest in terms of
revenue loss. The alternative fuels production credit is the largest energyrelated tax expenditure, with estimated revenue losses of about $2.4
billion in fiscal year 2006. 9

$4.9 billion in fiscal year 2005.

9

**Figure 3: DOE’s Budget Authority for Renewable, Fossil, and Nuclear R&D, Fiscal Years 1978 through 2005**

**Dollars in millions**

**2,500**

**2,000**

**1,500**

**1,000**

**500**

**0**

**Fiscal year**

Nuclear

Fossil

Renewable

Source: GAO analysis of DOE data.

Note: Budget authority is in real terms, adjusted to fiscal year 2005 dollars to account for inflation.
Excludes DOE program management costs and indirect facilities costs of DOE laboratories.

In fiscal year 2006, the Congress provided about $982 million in budget
authority for energy R&D, including $324 million for renewable energy
R&D, about $434 million for fossil energy R&D, and about $224 million for

8 Summing tax expenditure estimates is useful to gauge their general magnitude but does
not take into account interactions between individual provisions.

9 The alternative fuels production credit is a tax credit of $3 per oil equivalent barrel (in
1979 dollars) for gas produced from biomass or synthetic fuels produced from coal.

**Page 13** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

nuclear energy R&D (see fig. 4). The biomass, solar, and hydrogen energy
programs received about 80 percent of the renewable energy R&D budget
authority. Similarly, coal R&D programs received more than 80 percent of
the fossil energy R&D budget authority, particularly for developing and
demonstrating advanced gasification technologies—including integrated
gasification combined cycle (IGCC)—mercury capture, and sequestration
technologies. DOE’s top nuclear energy R&D priority is to encourage
electric power companies to submit applications to NRC for licenses to
build and operate Generation III nuclear reactors by competitively
awarding funds for preparing early site permits and NRC combined license
applications. The nuclear R&D program also is developing Generation IV
nuclear reactor technologies, especially ones that can reprocess spent
nuclear fuel that reduce both proliferation risks and the amount of waste
generated.

**Figure 4: DOE’s Budget Authority for Renewable, Fossil, and Nuclear R&D, Fiscal**
**Year 2006**

**Dollars in millions**

**400**

**350**

**300**

**250**

**200**

**150**

**100**

**50**

**0**

Source: GAO analysis of DOE data.

**Page 14** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

Note: Budget authority is in fiscal year 2006 dollars. Excludes DOE program management costs,
indirect facilities costs of DOE laboratories, and funding for fuel cells—historically, an energy
efficiency program.

DOE’s Renewable R&D Over the past 29 years, DOE has made steady incremental progress in
Focuses on Innovations in making each of the renewable energy technologies more cost-competitive;
Ethanol, Wind, Solar, and for example, DOE and its industry partners have reduced wind energy

costs by more than 80 percent. DOE’s renewable energy R&D efforts have

Hydrogen Energy

focused on developing ethanol, wind, and solar energy technologies. More

Technologies

recently, in January 2003, the administration announced the Hydrogen
Fuel Initiative and proposed spending $1.2 billion over 5 years to support
research in hydrogen and fuel cell technologies. While DOE has conducted
R&D in geothermal and hydropower technologies since the late 1970s, the
administration’s 2007 budget proposed to eliminate both programs.

Ethanol

DOE’s ethanol R&D program, the primary component of its biomass R&D
efforts, is developing technologies to reduce the cost of producing ethanol,
which can be blended with gasoline to reduce harmful exhaust emissions.
In the early years of the biomass program, DOE focused on developing
biofuels and biomass energy systems that primarily relied on corn as the
energy source. As the biomass program evolved, it sought to make
biorefinery-related technologies cost- and performance-competitive. As of
October 2006, 106 biorefineries were operating throughout the United
States to supply (1) oil refineries with ethanol to oxygenate gasoline—
ethanol is a substitute for methyl tertiary-butyl ether (MTBE), which some
states have banned because of concerns about groundwater
contamination, and (2) fuel suppliers with ethanol to produce E85, a blend
of 85 percent ethanol and 15 percent gasoline that can be used in flex fuel
vehicles. 10

The long-term goal of DOE’s biomass R&D program is to enable U.S.
industry to produce enough biofuels equivalent to 30 percent of current
gasoline demand—about 60 billion gallons of biofuels per year—by 2030.
To meet this goal, the biomass program is focused on developing
additional sources of ethanol from cellulosic biomass, such as agricultural
residues, forest wastes, and energy crops. According to DOE, producing
cellulosic ethanol is difficult because it requires a complex chemical
process to convert the plant material into a simple sugar to use for

10 Flex fuel vehicles operate on any blend of ethanol and gasoline, from 0 percent ethanol
and 100 percent gasoline, up to 85 percent ethanol and 15 percent gasoline.

**Page 15** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

Wind

ethanol. The biomass program is also working with industry to
demonstrate biorefinery technologies and assess infrastructure needs.

DOE’s wind R&D program primarily is focused on developing efficient
wind turbines that convert the wind’s power into electrical power.
Historically, DOE’s wind program focused on developing wind turbines for
high-wind sites because it was the easiest way to achieve significant levels
of electric power generation. High-wind sites—referred to as Class 6—
typically are located in areas where the wind regularly blows from 18 to 20
miles per hour. During the past 29 years, DOE and its industry partners
have made technological improvements that reduced the cost of wind
energy by more than 80 percent, and industry has built wind farms on
many of the high-wind sites that are easily accessible.

DOE’s wind R&D program primarily is seeking to develop new costeffective technology for deploying wind turbines for low-wind areas in the
United States and exploring the possibility of offshore wind development.
Low-wind sites—referred to as Class 4—generally are located in areas of
sustained winds of 16 to 17 miles per hour and primarily are located in the
Midwest from Texas to the Canadian border. The advantages of
developing low-wind resources are that low-wind sites are far more
plentiful than high-wind sites and are located closer to electricity load
centers, which can substantially reduce the cost of connecting to the
electricity transmission grid. DOE’s R&D program is focused on
developing wind turbine technology for low-wind sites because easily
accessible high-wind sites are becoming scarce. Specifically, the turbine
rotor diameter must be much larger to harvest the low-energy winds
without increasing costs, and the tower must be taller to take advantage of
the increasing wind speed at greater heights. DOE is using public/private
partnerships to improve wind turbine designs and components and
demonstrate full-scale prototypes. DOE’s goal is to reduce the cost of lowwind generated electricity from about 4.5 to 5.5 cents per kilowatt-hour in
2002 to 3.6 cents per kilowatt-hour by 2012.

DOE’s wind R&D program is also exploring wind energy technology for
the distinct needs of offshore wind sites. While the United States currently
has no offshore wind farms, several projects have been proposed in the
waters off the Northeast and Gulf coasts. DOE estimates that there are

over 900,000 megawatts of potential wind energy off the coasts of the
United States, roughly between 6 and 58 miles offshore. Several European
countries, including Denmark, Ireland, and the United Kingdom, have
deployed wind farms in the shallow (less than 100 feet deep) waters off
their coastlines using wind turbine designs adapted from land-based

**Page 16** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

Solar

versions. However, the European offshore sites are different from
potential U.S. offshore wind sites, which are generally located in deeper
waters and expected to have more severe wind, wave, and ice conditions.
As a result, many U.S. sites will require new technologies. DOE’s offshore
wind R&D activities include mapping coastal wind resources, organizing
workshops for knowledge sharing, and collaborating with industry in
developing offshore technologies to address design, offshore transmission,
and interconnection issues. DOE is also collaborating with European
nations on deep-water wind energy and with states to identify the
regulatory, environmental, and technical issues facing offshore wind
energy. DOE’s goal is to reduce the cost of electricity generated by
offshore wind farms located in water 100 to 200 feet deep from an
estimated 12 cents per kilowatt-hour today to 5 cents per kilowatt-hour by
2016.

DOE’s solar R&D program is working to make solar energy technologies a
more cost-competitive source of electricity. Specifically, DOE’s extensive
work has advanced solar technologies, improved efficiency and reliability,
lowered costs, and resulted in more than 235 patents. While solar energy
technologies have evolved and costs have decreased, DOE is focused on
further reducing solar energy costs to compete in the residential,
commercial, and industrial energy markets and for solar technology to
penetrate the market sufficiently to create a sustainable solar industry.
Currently, DOE’s solar R&D program focuses on developing advanced
photovoltaics, also called solar cells, that produce electricity directly from
absorbed photons from sunlight; solar heating and lighting systems; and
utility-size, solar-power plants.

DOE’s photovoltaic R&D program is designed to increase performance,
reduce costs, and enhance the reliability of photovoltaic systems. DOE
initially focused on using crystalline-silicon, which continues to hold the
majority of the photovoltaic market today. DOE’s second generation of
photovoltaic R&D focuses on thin-film technology, which is designed to
use less materials to reduce costs and can be made into a variety of forms.
DOE’s goal is to lower the cost of photovoltaics so that they are an
affordable alternative to traditional electricity sources across all sectors.
DOE is working to reduce the costs of photovoltaics from about 18 to 23
cents per kilowatt-hour in 2005 to about 5 to 10 cents per kilowatt-hour by
2015.

DOE’s solar heating and lighting R&D program is developing technologies
that use sunlight for various thermal applications, particularly space
heating and cooling, water heating, and to illuminate building interiors.

**Page 17** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

Hydrogen

Geothermal

DOE’s R&D program is focused on advancing materials, design, and
manufacturability that will lower costs of solar water heaters, improve
their performance, and ease installation. DOE seeks to reduce the costs of
solar water-heating systems operating in cold climates from about 11 to 12
cents per kilowatt-hour today to about 5 to 6 cents per kilowatt-hour by
2011. DOE is also working with industry to fully commercialize solar
lighting systems. However, the administration’s fiscal year 2007 budget
proposed eliminating funding for the solar heating and lighting R&D

program.

DOE is also working with industry and southwestern states to develop
utility-size solar power plants that use two types of concentrating solar
power technologies: trough systems and dish/engine systems. These
technologies use various mirror configurations to convert the sun’s energy
into high-temperature heat that is used to generate electricity in a steam
generator. DOE’s goal is to reduce the cost of utility-size solar power
plants in the Southwest from 12 to 14 cents per kilowatt-hour in 2005 to 10
to 12 cents per kilowatt-hour by 2010.

In January 2003, the administration announced the Hydrogen Fuel
Initiative and proposed spending $1.2 billion over 5 years to support
research in hydrogen and fuel cell technologies. The initiative’s objective
is to accelerate the development of technologies to produce and distribute
hydrogen to power fuel cells to replace the internal combustion engine in
vehicles. While hydrogen is used as a fuel for aerospace and rocket
propulsion applications, it is primarily used in the petroleum refining and
fertilizer industries. DOE’s hydrogen R&D program is focused on
developing technologies for production and delivery, storage, conversion,
and end-use applications and on standards formulation and other
research. The program’s goal is to develop the technology needed to allow
industry to make a technology readiness decision in 2015 and introduce
new hydrogen vehicles by 2020. However, these technologies are not
expected to penetrate the market or significantly displace oil before 2030.

DOE’s geothermal R&D program is developing technologies to improve
the efficiency and cost competitiveness of geothermal technologies, which
currently provide about 0.3 percent of total U.S. electricity and heating
needs. 11 DOE’s R&D program has changed over time from a resource

11 See also GAO, _Renewable Energy: Increased Geothermal Development Will Depend on_
_Overcoming Many Challenges,_ [GAO-06-629 (Washington, D.C.: May 24, 2006).](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-06-629)

**Page 18** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

Hydropower

oriented, long-term, high-risk program to a cost-shared, competitively
selected R&D program to meet immediate industry needs in geosciences,
drilling, resource engineering, and energy conversion technologies. The
program has developed drilling tools that oil and gas companies have
adapted for exploration and helped introduce geothermal heat pumps into
the market. 12 The current goals of the geothermal R&D program are to (1)

decrease the cost of geothermal electricity from about 8 to 9 cents per
kilowatt-hour in 2004 to about 3 to 5 cents per kilowatt-hour by 2010; (2)
improve hydrothermal technologies by increasing the productivity and
lifetime of reservoirs, improve technology performance, and reduce the
costs associated with drilling geothermal wells; (3) develop additional
geothermal resources; and (4) explore the technical feasibility of mining
heat from hot dry rock and magma. However, the administration’s fiscal
year 2007 budget proposed eliminating funding for the geothermal R&D

program.

Since 1991, annual budget authority for DOE’s hydropower R&D program
has not exceeded $6 million (in real terms) for developing cost-effective
technologies to improve the operation of hydropower facilities and
address environmental concerns. Hydropower is currently the largest
source of renewable energy, generating as much as 10 percent of U.S.
electricity. The most common type of hydropower plant uses a dam on a
river to store water in a reservoir. Water released from the reservoir flows

through a turbine, spinning it, which, in turn, activates a generator to
produce electricity. Current hydropower technologies can have
undesirable environmental effects, such as fish injury and mortality from
passage through hydropower systems, and negative impacts on the quality
of water downstream. DOE has been working with industry to improve the
environmental and operational performance of hydropower systems.
DOE’s goal is to demonstrate advanced turbine technologies that will
enable a 10 percent growth in generation at existing hydropower plants
and enhance environmental performance by 2010. However, the
administration’s fiscal year 2007 budget proposed eliminating funding for
the hydropower R&D program.

12 Geothermal heat pumps are used for space heating and cooling, as well as water heating.
The heat pump transfers heat stored in the earth or in groundwater into a building during
the winter and transfers it out of the building and back into the ground during the summer.

**Page 19** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

DOE’s Fossil R&D
Program Has Focused on
Reducing Harmful
Emissions and Improving
the Efficiency of Burning
Coal

Coal

DOE’s fossil energy R&D has focused primarily on reducing emissions and
increasing the efficiency of coal-fired power plants. DOE also has
supported oil and natural gas R&D through cost-shared partnerships with
industry, with most funding focused on advanced drilling and piping
technologies for exploration and production.

In the 1980s and early 1990s, DOE’s clean coal technology programs used
cost-shared cooperative agreements with power companies to
demonstrate technologies for reducing sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide
emissions from coal-fired power plants. In part as a result of concerns
about acid rain and transboundary pollution, the 1990 Clean Air Act
amendments required that the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) regulate hazardous air pollutants, including sulfur dioxide and
nitrogen oxide emissions. 13 Technologies demonstrated by the clean coal

technology program contributed to a 98-percent reduction in sulfur
dioxide and similar targets for nitrogen oxide emissions from coal-fired
power plants from 1986 to 2005.

While DOE’s fossil R&D program seeks to further reduce sulfur dioxide
and nitrogen oxide emissions, its overall objective is to drive all coal-fired
power plant emissions to “near-zero” levels by 2020. To enable industry to
meet Clean Air Act standards, as well as new goals set out by the
administration’s Clear Skies Initiative and EPA regulations, 14 DOE has

focused on reducing mercury and carbon dioxide emissions—significant
contributors to health hazards and global warming, respectively. DOE’s
objective is to reduce mercury emissions by 95 percent and capture and
store—or “sequester”—up to 90 percent of carbon dioxide emissions by
2020. Carbon dioxide capture and storage technologies would separate
carbon dioxide from other gases produced during the combustion process
and would transport the captured carbon dioxide to a suitable long-term
storage site, such as geologic repositories or in the deep ocean.

13 Under the Clean Air Act, EPA sets limits on how much of a pollutant can be in the air
anywhere in the United States, which it can enforce by fining companies that violate air
pollution limits.

14 EPA has promulgated a Clean Air Mercury Rule for mercury and a Clean Air Interstate
Rule for sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide reductions across the states.

**Page 20** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

DOE is also working to improve the efficiency of coal-fired plants by up to
50 percent by 2010 and 60 percent by 2020. According to DOE, pulverized
coal-fired plants using currently available technology are only about 35percent efficient—meaning about 65 percent of the energy generated by
the plant is lost during the conversion process, mostly as heat that is not
converted to electricity. Several of DOE’s current fossil R&D projects aim
to develop coal-based plants that employ new, more efficient gasification
technologies. Rather than burning coal directly, gasification breaks coal
down into a synthesis gas, comprised primarily of carbon monoxide and
hydrogen, which is combusted to turn a gas turbine, generating electricity.
Heat from the combustion process is captured and directed toward a
steam turbine, which also generates electricity. According to DOE,
industry, and association officials, power plants using an IGCC
configuration for gasification increase the efficiency of electricity
generation and substantially reduce harmful emissions in comparison with
conventional pulverized coal technology (see table 1).

**Table 1: Comparison of Conventional Pulverized Coal and IGCC Technologies**

**IGCC**

Performance characteristic

**New conventional pulverized**
**coal plant** **current** **near future** **2020**

Mercury emissions (pounds/year) **45** **29** **29** **26**

Sulfur dioxide emissions (tons/year) **3,027** **566** **276** **250**

Nitrogen oxide emissions (tons/year) **1,412** **1,094** **219** **198**

Carbon dioxide emissions (tons/year) **3,700,000** **3,600,000** **3,500,000** **3,200,000**

Potential for carbon capture and sequestration **Limited** **Yes** **Yes** **Yes**

Plant efficiency (percent) **38.6** **39.7** **45-50** **50-60**

Source: The Electric Power Research Institute and DOE.

Note: DOE is the source of plant efficiency data for the “near future” and 2020. The Electric Power
Research Institute provided all other data.

Coal-based power plants that employ IGCC technologies break down coal
into its basic chemical elements, allowing for the capture of carbon
dioxide as a concentrated gas stream. In contrast, conventional pulverized
coal plants burn coal directly, creating a more diluted stream of carbon
dioxide that is much more costly to separate from the larger mass of gases
flowing from the combustor. As such, IGCC plants offer greater potential
for carbon capture and sequestration to reduce carbon dioxide emissions.
Moreover, according to international climate change experts at the United
Nations Environment Programme and the World Meteorological
Organization, carbon dioxide capture and sequestration technologies have

**Page 21** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

the most potential for significantly mitigating climate change when applied
in IGCC plants. Currently, only two coal-based IGCC plants in the United
States are fully operational and produce electricity, and an additional 28
coal gasification plants are planned for operation by 2030.

To meet its emissions and efficiency goals, DOE recently proposed a $1
billion advanced coal-based power plant R&D project called FutureGen—
cost-shared between DOE (76 percent) and industry (24 percent)—which
will demonstrate how IGCC technology can both reduce emissions and
improve efficiency by integrating IGCC with carbon capture and
sequestration technologies. According to DOE, FutureGen is designed to
be the first “zero-emissions” coal-based power plant and is expected to be
operational by 2015. In addition to producing electricity and capturing and
storing 1 million metric tons of carbon dioxide, the 275 megawatt plant
also will be capable of producing hydrogen.

Oil and Natural Gas Since 1978, DOE has supported oil and natural gas R&D, mainly through
cost-shared partnerships with industry. Historically, DOE’s R&D funding
for oil and natural gas was principally divided among specific resources,
such as gas shales and coal-bed methane. In the mid-1980s, however, DOE
switched its focus to developing energy technologies that cross multiple
resources. Recently, DOE’s R&D has focused on improving oil exploration
technologies, extending the life of current oil reservoirs, and developing
drilling technology for tapping into deep deposits of natural gas. For
example, DOE is working with industry to develop (1) a composite drill
pipe that is lighter, stronger, and more flexible than steel to improve oil
and natural gas extraction and (2) technology for tapping into the vast
amount of natural gas available in naturally occurring methane hydrate
found on land in permafrost regions and beneath the ocean floor at water
depths greater than 1,600 feet. In fiscal year 2005, exploration and
production and methane hydrate R&D received almost two-thirds of
DOE’s funding for oil and natural gas R&D. While DOE’s fiscal year 2006
budget proposed terminating the oil and natural gas R&D program, the
Congress provided $65 million. DOE’s fiscal year 2007 budget again
proposed terminating the oil and natural gas R&D program. In addition to
the appropriated funds that oil and natural gas R&D program receives,
section 999A-H of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 established a program for
R&D and commercialization of technologies for ultra-deepwater and
unconventional natural gas and other petroleum resource exploration and
production through September 2014 and authorized the use of $50 million
per year from federal oil and gas lease income for an 11-year period.

**Page 22** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

DOE’s Nuclear R&D Goals
Recently Have Focused on
Restarting the U.S. Nuclear
Power Industry,
Reprocessing Spent
Nuclear Fuel, and
Developing New Reactor
Designs

The commercial nuclear energy industry experienced substantial growth
during the 1960s and 1970s. By 1974, the federal government had approved
operating licenses for 52 nuclear reactors with plans for dozens more.
However, the energy crisis in the 1970s led to a significant reduction in
orders for new reactors and, coupled with concerns about reactor safety
and performance resulting from the 1979 accident at Three Mile Island, the
industry canceled the application process for 93 other reactors. DOE
began to focus on short-term R&D, working specifically to restore public
trust and regulator confidence by improving safety and efficiency of
operations. By the mid-1990s, the industry had dramatically improved its
safety record, and the performance of nuclear power exceeded that of any
other source of energy, reaching 90 percent of total potential capacity. Left
with only incremental improvements in operations and uncertain
economics, the Congress began to phase out funding DOE’s nuclear
energy R&D and terminated nuclear R&D funding altogether in fiscal year
1998.

In fiscal year 1999, DOE crafted a long-term nuclear energy R&D agenda
that focused on developing more efficient systems and proliferationresistant fuel cycles, devising new technologies for managing nuclear
waste, and designing a fourth generation of nuclear reactors that would
not use conventional light water reactor technology. In fiscal year 2001,
DOE prioritized its R&D program to focus on (1) the Nuclear Power 2010
program, (2) the Advanced Fuel Cycle Initiative (AFCI), and (3) the
Generation IV Nuclear Energy Systems Initiative.

DOE’s Nuclear Power 2010 initiative has shared the costs that

participating power companies have incurred in preparing either an early
site permit or an application for an NRC license to construct and operate
an advanced Generation III nuclear power reactor. In the years after the
Three Mile Island accident, the nuclear power industry stated that NRC’s
regulatory process had become too cumbersome, leading to costly delays
in construction and licensing and becoming a major stumbling block to
investing in a new nuclear reactor. In response, NRC promulgated
regulations in 1989 that established a single combined license to construct
and operate a new reactor, replacing its prior requirement that companies
obtain both a construction permit and an operating license. 15 More

recently, in fiscal year 2002, to encourage power companies to apply to
NRC for a combined construction and operating license, DOE initiated a

15 See 54 _Fed. Reg_ . 15383 (1989).

**Page 23** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

demonstration program with three power companies seeking early site
permits for potential nuclear reactor sites in Illinois, Mississippi, and
Virginia. The permits, applications for which were submitted to NRC in
2003, would allow the sites to be used for nuclear power plants, but the
power companies still would have to apply to NRC for a combined license
to construct and operate any reactors later built on these sites. In fiscal
year 2004, DOE began a demonstration program with two industry
consortia to develop applications for NRC licenses to build and operate
two additional reactors at existing nuclear power plants. These
applications may be submitted to NRC next year. Even if NRC approves
the licenses, which NRC estimates will take 42 months, the industry
consortia have not committed to constructing the new reactors. The
industry has, however, received license extensions for 44 of the 103
operating nuclear reactors. DOE allocated $65.3 million to the Nuclear
Power 2010 program in fiscal year 2006 and requested $54 million for fiscal
year 2007.

The AFCI program is designed to develop and demonstrate technologies
for reprocessing spent nuclear fuel that could recover the fuel for reuse,
minimize proliferation threats, and reduce the long-term hazard and
disposal requirements of spent nuclear fuel. In the 1970s, the United States
pioneered reprocessing technologies, but it abandoned the concept
because of concerns about nuclear proliferation—plutonium could be
separated to manufacture nuclear weapons. 16 Current R&D efforts focus

on reprocessing spent fuel without separating the plutonium, with the goal
of rendering it virtually useless to potential proliferators. Much of the
reprocessed fuel could be reused in commercial reactors to generate
electricity.

In February 2006, DOE announced the Global Nuclear Energy Partnership
(GNEP) program, characterizing it as an extension of the AFCI program.
GNEP furthers the R&D goals of the AFCI program, accelerating the R&D
efforts and introducing a global component. DOE’s intent is to work with
other nations that reprocess spent fuel to supply fuel to countries for the
purpose of generating electricity. The countries then would return the
spent fuel to the supplier nations for reprocessing. Once reprocessed, this
fuel would be returned to the countries for reuse. The intent of the
program is to encourage these “reactor-only” countries not to develop

16 In 1977, President Carter announced plans to indefinitely suspend U.S. reprocessing
efforts.

**Page 24** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

their own independent nuclear technologies, thereby reducing
proliferation risks. Details of the program are still being developed. DOE
requested $243 million for the combined AFCI and GNEP programs in
fiscal year 2007. According to DOE officials, the GNEP program would
need about $5 billion over the next 5 years.

The Generation IV program focuses on developing new, fourth generation,
advanced reactor technologies intended to be commercially available by
about 2020 to 2030. The program, including the United States and 12
international partners, identified six advanced reactor designs from which
DOE has focused on two reactor designs: (1) a sodium-cooled fast reactor
and (2) a gas-cooled very high temperature reactor. A fast reactor manages
nuclear reactions somewhat differently than current commercial reactors,
in which neutrons interact with the low-enriched uranium fuel atoms to

induce fissions—or the splitting of the uranium atom—that emits more
neutrons and leads to a self-sustaining chain reaction. The fissioning of
uranium releases large amounts of energy that is captured as heat to drive
turbines and generate electricity. Because the fission neutrons are born at
high energy, they are not inherently efficient at causing more fissions, so
commercial nuclear reactors are filled with water that functions both to

slow the neutrons down and act as a coolant and heat removal system. The
lower energy neutrons in current commercial reactors are much more
effective at sustaining the uranium fission chain reaction. In contrast, a
fast reactor manages these nuclear reactions at a higher energy level. Fast
reactors use coolants such as liquid sodium metal that do not slow down
the neutron energy. Because fast reactors are more effective than current
commercial reactors at inducing fissions in a wider variety of nuclear
materials, including plutonium and other materials that might otherwise
become wastes from the current commercial reactor fuel cycle, they can
potentially reduce the total amount, temperature, and radiotoxicity of the
fuel that might otherwise have to be stored for many thousands of years in
a geologic repository. The lower temperature may also allow more spent
fuel to be stored at a deep geologic repository, delaying the need for
additional repository requirements. This continuous recycle and burning
of spent nuclear fuel materials is key to the GNEP program.

The gas-cooled very high temperature reactor is also being developed
through DOE’s Next Generation Nuclear Plant program because the high
temperature allows for the efficient production of hydrogen by splitting
water. U.S. industries annually produce over 9 million tons of hydrogen to,
for example, manufacture fertilizer and refine petroleum. Very high
temperature reactors may become an efficient and emissions free
alternative source of hydrogen, which is made primarily from natural gas.

**Page 25** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

The very high temperature reactor can be more efficient than current
reactors and is designed to be versatile, capable of generating small or
large amounts of electricity. DOE requested $31.4 million for fiscal year
2007 for the Generation IV R&D efforts.

Renewable Energy
Technologies Face a
Variety of Technical and
Deployment Barriers

Ethanol

The primary renewable energy technologies with the potential to
substantially expand their existing production capacity during the next 25
years are biomass, a partial substitute for gasoline in transportation, and
wind and solar energy technologies for generating electricity.

In 2005, 95 ethanol refineries located in 19 states produced 3.9 billion
gallons of ethanol—an increase of 17 percent over 2004 and 126 percent
over 2001. The United States will consume about 5 billion gallons of
ethanol in 2006, according to the industry’s September 2006 projections.
Ethanol is blended in 30 percent of the nation’s gasoline and is primarily
produced in the Midwest because of the abundant supply of corn. Ethanol
demand is expected to continue to grow as a result of the national
renewable fuels standard, 17 enacted by the Energy Policy Act of 2005, and

the decision of many oil refineries to switch to using ethanol instead of

17 The national renewable fuels standard establishes a baseline for renewable fuel use,
beginning with 4 billion gallons per year in 2006 and expanding to 7.5 billion gallons by
2012.

**Page 26** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

MTBE as a fuel additive in gasoline that improves its octane and cleanburning properties. 18

One of ethanol’s biggest challenges is how to cost-effectively expand the
supply of biomass, in addition to corn, to enable the total ethanol market
to grow. DOE scientists are exploring technologies that can costeffectively use cellulosic biomass—low-value residues such as wheat
straw and corn stover or bio-energy crops such as fast-growing grasses
and trees. Some bio-energy crops, such as switchgrass, require less
fertilizer than corn and can be grown in many U.S. regions. While
cellulosic ethanol requires less fossil energy than corn ethanol on a total
life-cycle basis, capital costs are substantially higher for cellulosic ethanol
plants than for corn ethanol plants. In addition, cellulosic ethanol
producers need to reduce costs for (1) harvesting and handling cellulosic
feedstock, (2) enzymes for converting cellulose to fermentable sugars, and
(3) novel fermenting micro-organisms that can convert these biomassderived sugars to ethanol. Cellulosic ethanol currently costs at least twice
as much to produce as corn ethanol, according to DOE officials.

A related challenge is producing sufficient biomass levels without
disrupting current production of food and forest products. In 2005, 1.43
billion bushels of corn—nearly 13 percent of the U.S. corn crop—were
used for ethanol production. In a 2005 report, the U.S. Department of
Agriculture and DOE estimated that the nation is capable of producing
enough ethanol to replace 30 percent of the U.S. oil consumption by 2030
and still meet food, feed, and export demands. 19 However, some experts

have expressed concern that large-scale diversion of agricultural
resources to generate ethanol could result in higher food prices for people
and livestock. There are also questions about the amount of land that will
be needed to produce higher levels of ethanol, whether vast preserved
areas will be transformed into farmland, water quality issues, and soil
sustainability. In addition, scientists have debated whether ethanol is an
effective petroleum substitute because of the amount of energy needed to
produce it—a significant amount of energy is used because (1) fertilizer

18 According to EIA, oil refineries decided to eliminate MTBE primarily because (1) many
states have banned MTBE because of water contamination concerns, (2) industry’s liability
exposure by adding MTBE to gasoline, and (3) industry’s perception that liability exposure
increased because the Energy Policy Act of 2005 eliminated the oxygen content
requirement for reformulated gasoline.

19 DOE and USDA, _Biomass as Feedstock for a Bioenergy and Bioproducts Industry: The_
_Technical Feasibility of a Billion-Ton Annual Supply_, April 2005.

**Page 27** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

made from fossil fuels is used to grow the corn, (2) most U.S. biorefineries
use natural gas to convert biomass into ethanol, and (3) the corn and the
ethanol need to be transported.

A third challenge is the distribution of ethanol from the biorefinery to the
consumer, according to DOE officials. Ethanol cannot use the same
infrastructure as gasoline because it has corrosive qualities and is water
soluble. 20 As a result, an independent infrastructure system for

transporting and storing ethanol would be needed throughout the United
States. In particular, no pipelines exist to distribute ethanol from the
Midwest, where it is mainly produced, to major markets on the East and
West coasts. In addition, infrastructure constrains the distribution of
E85—a blend of 85 percent ethanol and 15 percent gasoline—because
regular gas stations must have separate tanks for storing E85 and
specialized pumps for dispensing it. Currently, fewer than 1,000 fueling
stations provide E85 nationwide, compared with 176,000 gas stations.
These ethanol fueling stations are concentrated in the upper Midwest, and
about 75 percent of ethanol is transported by rail and 25 percent is moved
by truck. U.S. consumers have bought more than 5 million flexible fuel
vehicles that can run on E85; however, without a ready supply of E85,
many of these vehicles will continue to operate using gasoline.

Ethanol also faces the challenge of becoming more price-competitive with
gasoline. Currently the market for ethanol relies on federal tax incentives.
One such incentive is the volumetric ethanol excise tax credit, enacted in
2004, which provides a 51-cent tax credit for every gallon of ethanol used
to produce a fuel mixture through December 31, 2010. Even with tax
incentives for ethanol producers, the fuel has been more expensive than
gasoline, in part because ethanol’s energy content is lower than gasoline’s.
According to DOE and EPA, flex fuel vehicles require about one-third
more ethanol to match gasoline’s energy content. Similarly, in October
2006, Consumer Reports, estimated that drivers paying $2.91 per gallon for
E85 in August 2006 actually paid about $3.99 for the energy equivalent of a
gallon of gasoline because the distance vehicles traveled per gallon
declined by 27 percent.

20 It is a normal occurrence for water to accumulate in oil pipelines. In most cases, water
enters the system through terminal and refinery tank roofs or can be dissolved in fuels
during refinery processes. Introducing ethanol into an oil pipeline risks rendering it
unusable as a transportation fuel.

**Page 28** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

Wind and Solar

Finally, congressional earmarks of DOE’s biomass R&D funding rose from
14 percent of the fiscal year 2000 funds to 57 percent ($52 million) of the
fiscal year 2006 funds, according to a DOE program official. 21 DOE

program officials told us that the rising number of biomass earmarks
shifted funding away from DOE’s R&D program, causing the biomass
program to change its program priorities and terminated some of its costshared projects. Congressionally earmarked projects typically are not
subject to peer review, are not selected on either their technical merits or
their contribution to meeting program goals, and are only voluntarily
accountable for reporting results.

Both wind and solar technologies have experienced substantial growth in
recent years; they have benefited from federal and state financial
incentives, DOE’s R&D programs that decreased costs and improved
efficiencies, and environmental and energy security concerns. For
example, U.S. wind electric generation capacity has grown from 2,000
megawatts in 1999 to 10,000 megawatts by August 2006, enough energy to
power about 2.5 million homes 22 with electricity on a typical day. Similarly,

the total photovoltaic market has grown, on average, about 30 percent per
year over the past 10 years, according to a solar manufacturer. In 2005, the
United States had an estimated 475 megawatts of installed photovoltaic
capacity, enough to power about 240,000 homes. EIA data show that in
2005 domestic shipments of solar photovoltaic solar technology increased
by 72 percent over 2004.

The wind energy industry faces technological challenges to improve
turbine design, performance, and reliability that will enable wind power to
expand into low wind and offshore locations. These locations use bigger
wind turbines with longer blades mounted on taller towers, requiring
complex design improvements in such areas as blade development,
advanced drive train and power electronics, and advanced controls to
reduce system loads. For example, while traditional blade materials have
used fiberglass technology, the next generation of turbines will need stiffer
and stronger materials, such as carbon fiber, to make longer, thinner, but
equally durable blades. Similarly, offshore wind development faces new
technical challenges, such as understanding the effects of wave and

21 Similarly, earmarks accounted for about $43 million, or 27 percent, of appropriated funds
for DOE’s hydrogen and fuel cell R&D program in fiscal year 2006.

22 One megawatt of wind power generates about as much electricity as 240 to 300
households use each year.

**Page 29** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

current loads on the base of wind structures, connecting offshore wind
farms to the electric transmission grid, and designing support structures
for turbines located in deep water.

Solar technologies also face challenges of improving the scientific
understanding of the electronic process of capturing and converting
sunlight at the molecular level and technical challenges of improving
performance and reliability. For example, DOE is pursuing thin-film
photovoltaic technologies, which are designed to reduce material costs by
using thin layers of semiconductor material. According to DOE, this
technology is not as efficient in converting sunlight to electricity as
conventional crystalline-silicon solar cells, but manufacturing costs are
anticipated to be lower. The challenge is to increase their efficiency, while
continuing to reduce the costs of manufacturing thin-film technologies.
DOE scientists are also seeking to reduce failure rates for components in
solar water-heating systems that are exposed to high temperatures and
improve the 12-year tank life of current solar heaters in cold climates.

A second major challenge to deploying both wind and solar technologies is
overcoming investors’ concern about their higher up-front capital costs. In
particular, wind investors pay substantial up-front capital costs to build a
facility and connect it to the power transmission grid. Constructing a wind
farm may cost less than connecting the facility to the power transmission
grid, according to DOE officials who noted that the connection could cost
$100,000 or more per mile, on average, depending on such factors as the
project’s size, the terrain, and the transmission line rating. In addition, in
most areas, a wind farm’s investors would pay for upgrading the power
transmission grid to carry the extra load, which can be high because prime
wind resources are often found far from large urban areas that need the
electricity. Similarly, the primary barrier to deploying solar photovoltaic
technologies is their up-front purchase costs, which continue to make
them more expensive than traditional energy sources, according to DOE
and industry executives. 23 More recently, the rapidly growing solar energy

industry has experienced an industrywide shortage of solar-grade
silicon—the principal material for making crystalline-silicon photovoltaic
cells—because of competition from other industries, such as computer
chip manufacturers. As a result, the price of silicon wafers on the market
has doubled in each of the past 2 years, according to EIA. The tight silicon

23 The Energy Policy Act of 2005 also established a new residential investment tax credit for
solar energy systems that provides a 2-year tax credit through December 31, 2007.

**Page 30** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

supply has also created back orders of several months. Because
photovoltaic manufacturing costs have risen sharply, manufacturers have
changed their business strategies to maintain profits and continue to
finance their plans to expand their production and strengthen their
distribution capabilities.

Both wind and solar power also have unique intermittency characteristics
that can constrain their use because the existing power transmission grid
was built to accommodate large central-station power plants located near
population centers that operate full time. This system relies on precisely
predicting and controlling power plant output to avoid blackouts and
other disruptions. However, wind and solar energy are intermittent energy
sources because wind speed and sunlight vary, depending, for example, on
the time of day and the weather—on average, wind turbines operate the
equivalent of less than 40 percent of the hours in a year due to the
intermittency of wind. Alternatively, the electricity generated must be
immediately used or transmitted to the power transmission grid because
no cost-effective means exists for storing electricity. DOE is conducting
R&D in this area.

A recent challenge facing the wind industry is mitigating environmental
and community concerns about its adverse effects. While wind energy
does not create the pollution or greenhouse gas emissions associated with
fossil fuel power generation, some wind farms have resulted in the death
of birds and bats because they are located amidst migratory pathways or
important habitats. 24 Our 2005 report found that impacts of wind farms on

birds and other wildlife varied by region and by species, and the lack of
comprehensive data on bird and bat fatalities from wind turbines make it
difficult to make national assessments of the impact of wind turbines on
wildlife. 25 In addition, wind energy may face community opposition

because it affects visual aesthetics and landscapes. For example, the first
proposed U.S. offshore wind project, consisting of 130 wind turbines off
the coast of Massachusetts, ran into opposition from local residents and

24 The Fish and Wildlife Service estimates that some of the leading sources of bird mortality
per year are attacks by domestic and feral cats, hundreds of millions of bird deaths;
collisions with building windows, 97 million to 976 million bird deaths; poisoning from
pesticides, at least 72 million bird deaths; and collisions with communication towers, 4
million to 50 million bird deaths.

25 See GAO, _Wind Power: Impacts on Wildlife and Government Responsibilities for_
_Regulating Development and Protecting Wildlife,_ [GAO-05-906 (Washington, D.C.: Sept. 16,](http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-05-906)
2005).

**Page 31** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

organizations who oppose the appearance of wind turbines in Nantucket
Sound.

Another challenge for wind energy is that the federal production tax
credit—the primary federal financial incentive to stimulate the deployment
of renewable energy systems—periodically must be legislatively extended,
creating uncertainty among investors whether the tax credit will be
extended. The federal production tax credit, initially established by the
Energy Policy Act of 1992 for a limited duration, had expired before being
renewed by subsequent legislation in 1999, 2001, and 2003. The Energy
Policy Act of 2005 extended it an additional 2 years, until January 1, 2008.
According to DOE officials and industry representatives, the production
tax credit has helped to offset the significant higher capital costs per unit
of generating capacity needed to start up wind power projects, compared
with projects for fossil fuel power generation. However, the uncertainty
about the production tax credit’s availability has created a boom-and-bust
cycle for installing new wind power capacity—installation of new capacity
fell dramatically in years when the authorization for the tax credit expired
and its renewal was delayed, as compared with years when it was
available without interruption. Potential developers are reluctant to
commit resources to the planning and construction of new capacity
without the certainty that the tax credit will be reauthorized. Furthermore,
according to the American Wind Energy Association, 4 to 6 months before
the tax credit expires, financial lenders hesitate to provide capital for wind
projects because of the uncertainty of whether the tax credit will be
extended.

DOE officials and industry representatives believe the continued
availability of the production tax credit, or other subsidy support, is vital
to the potential future growth of the wind industry. According to an
industry representative, a long-term production tax credit would facilitate
steady market development for wind power and other renewable sources
by encouraging companies to enter the market, allowing the industry to
conduct long-term planning, and eventually help the industry stand on its
own. According to some stakeholders, renewable energy sources require
subsidies, such as the production tax credit, to level the playing field
because various subsidies for fossil fuel and nuclear technologies have
made it difficult for renewable energy sources to compete.

Both DOE’s wind and solar R&D programs have experienced a large
increase in the amount of congressional earmarks in recent years. Wind
energy earmarks grew from 6 percent of funding in fiscal year 2004 to
about 33 percent ($13 million) of funding in fiscal year 2006, according to a

**Page 32** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

Barriers to Advanced
Fossil Technologies
Include Harmful Emissions
and High Capital Costs of
New Coal Gasification

Plants

DOE program official. Similarly, solar energy earmarks grew from 1
percent of funding in fiscal year 2004 to about 17 percent ($14 million) of
funding in fiscal year 2006, according to a DOE program official. An
industry association executive noted that congressional earmarks reduce
DOE’s ability to adequately fund its solar R&D programs and meet targets.

While coal-fired power plants have substantially reduced their sulfur
dioxide and nitrogen oxide emissions, electric power companies face
important challenges to deploying a new generation of advanced IGCC
coal gasification power plants. These challenges are to further reduce
mercury and carbon dioxide emissions and manage the risk associated
with high construction and operating costs of new advanced coal
technologies. The administration’s Clear Skies Initiative set goals for coalfired plants to cut their 2003 emissions—49 tons of mercury, 10.2 million
tons of sulfur dioxide, and 3.9 million tons of nitrogen oxide—by an
average of 70 percent by 2018. However, coal-fired plants also annually
emit 2.1 billion tons of carbon dioxide—the most significant contributor to
greenhouse gases and global warming—or 36 percent of the nation’s total
carbon dioxide emissions. EPA currently does not regulate carbon dioxide
emissions but might do so in the future to address the growing concern
about the harmful effects of greenhouse gases.

IGCC coal-gasification technology enables power plants to separate sulfur
dioxide, nitrogen oxide, mercury, and carbon dioxide before the synthesis
gas is burned, thus reducing their emission into the air. DOE and industry
are conducting R&D to develop sequestration technologies for the longterm storage of carbon dioxide gas without the gas gradually leaking back
into the atmosphere. DOE has funded 25 carbon-dioxide sequestration
projects as of September 2006, but has not yet demonstrated the storage of
carbon dioxide captured by a large-scale, coal-based power plant.
Specifically, when carbon dioxide is compressed and stored in geologic
formations, such as oil and gas reservoirs, its density is close to that of
some crude oils, resulting in buoyant forces that tend to drive carbon
dioxide upwards. It is unknown whether carbon dioxide will remain safely
sequestered if pressure, temperature, or other conditions change.
According to international climate change experts, leakages could
significantly affect climate change or contaminate groundwater. Moreover,
given the long-term nature of carbon dioxide capture and sequestration,
storage sites may require monitoring for very long periods of time—
possibly for “eternity,” according to one DOE official.

**Page 33** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

New coal gasification plants also face the high costs associated with
employing advanced energy technologies, such as IGCC and carbon
dioxide capture and sequestration systems. In particular, IGCC plants are
20 percent more expensive—about $100 million more—than pulverized
coal plants that use currently available technology, according to
International Energy Agency, DOE, and industry officials. Moreover,
carbon dioxide capture and sequestration technologies will further
increase an IGCC plant’s costs because capturing and sequestering carbon
dioxide increases fuel consumption by as much as 25 percent. According
to international climate change experts, an IGCC plant that employs
carbon dioxide capture and sequestration technologies could increase the
cost of electricity per kilowatt hour from 21 to 78 percent, depending on
plant design, the cost of fuel, and the storage site characteristics. 26

In addition to technological and cost barriers, the uncertainties
surrounding new coal-gasification technologies create substantial
investment risks that threaten to hinder development. Despite the greater
efficiency, reduced emissions, and the ability to capture carbon dioxide,
only four coal-based IGCC power plants currently operate worldwide. The
unproven nature of IGCC technology creates uncertainty and reluctance
among industry to invest in building a new coal-based IGCC power plant,
particularly given the additional cost, according to DOE and industry
officials. Furthermore, international climate change forecasting models
predict that carbon dioxide capture and sequestration systems are unlikely
to be deployed on a large scale without explicit government regulations
that substantially limit greenhouse gas emissions to the atmosphere. In
light of such technological uncertainties, industry officials noted that costsharing initiatives with DOE will continue to be an important factor in
encouraging the demonstration and deployment of IGCC plants.

26 The higher cost of electricity generated using IGCC technology in comparison with
conventional coal-fired technologies more fully reflects the total cost of burning coal by
including the cost of controlling the release of harmful emissions. Alternatively, several
countries have enacted a carbon tax that puts a value on the carbon emissions that
conventional coal-fired technologies generate.

**Page 34** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

Advanced Nuclear Energy
Technologies Face
Uncertainty about NRC’s
Regulatory Process, Public
Opposition, High Capital
Costs, and the Storage of
Nuclear Waste

The nuclear energy industry, DOE, and NRC face important challenges in
reinvigorating the nuclear power industry include an untried regulatory
process, the public’s concern about safe operations, investor concerns
about high capital costs, and uncertainty about the long-term storage of
nuclear waste. During the 1960s and 1970s, several nuclear power plants
experienced construction costs that doubled and time frames that
extended several years longer than anticipated—in one case, a project
took nearly 20 years to build and begin operations, according to the
Nuclear Energy Institute, an industry association. Since 1974, power
companies have cancelled applications for 93 proposed reactors and have
shut down 22 of 126 operating reactors before their 40-year license
expired. NRC issued its last permit to construct a nuclear reactor in 1978,
the year before the Three Mile Island nuclear reactor accident, which
heightened public opposition to nuclear power and tightened NRC’s
oversight of nuclear power plant operations. More recently, however, NRC
has approved a 20-year license extension for 44 of the 103 operating
nuclear reactors in the United States and is reviewing applications to
extend the licenses for 10 additional reactors.

Because NRC has not issued a construction permit in almost 30 years,
investors worry that the problems that contributed to the schedule delays,
cost overruns, and abandonment of many planned reactors may not be
resolved. Among the reasons for these problems were that electric power
companies custom-built many of the nuclear power plants, rather than
using a standard design, and sometimes began construction with
preliminary design information, only to resort to mid-construction retrofits
as final design plans changed. In addition, NRC’s regulatory process at that
time required the applicant to obtain a construction permit first and apply
for an operating license in the midst of construction. Final approval of the
operating license sometimes hinged on time-consuming and costly
retrofits, particularly if operational procedures conflicted with design
features.

To reduce these high costs and long time frames, NRC streamlined its
licensing process in 1989 by combining its construction and operating
licenses into a single license that requires applicants to submit final design
information, safety analyses, and environmental data in advance of or with
the license application. While industry representatives generally agree that
the revised licensing process reduces risk of costly retrofits, they are
concerned that the new process has not been tested and could still lead to
extensive delays. For example, some representatives noted that NRC has
already fallen behind schedule in reviewing the early site permits that
three electric power companies submitted as part of a DOE demonstration

**Page 35** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

program to stimulate power companies to apply to NRC for a combined
construction and operating license. The early site permits address site
suitability matters such as safety and environmental issues and, once
obtained, can be used as a reference in a combined license application to
streamline the site suitability portion of the application. 27 NRC

acknowledged the delays, attributing them to a learning process under
new procedures and regulations; an unexpectedly large number of public
comments received electronically; and, in one case, the applicant’s
decision to change the design. Electric power companies have notified
NRC that they plan to submit license applications to build and operate at
least 29 new reactors. To prepare, NRC has implemented a designcentered approach that encourages applicants to use a standardized
design for each reactor manufacturer with variations only to address the
site’s local characteristics, such as environmental conditions. NRC also
has created a separate Office of New Reactors to oversee the licensing
process, plans to hire 400 additional staff by fiscal year 2008, and is
developing a more robust system to handle electronic comments. NRC
expects to review license applications and issue a decision within 42
months. However, while it has issued its draft regulatory guidance for
submitting and reviewing the combined license applications, NRC does
not expect to finalize the guidance until March 2007.

A second challenge that investors face is public opposition to nuclear
power. According to the nuclear energy industry, public support for
nuclear power has increased in recent years, primarily as a result of the
industry’s improved safety record and a growing awareness that nuclear
power production releases few greenhouse gases. 28 Electric power

companies plan to construct most of the announced new reactors at
existing nuclear power plants in the southeast United States, where public
opinion is more favorable toward nuclear power. Reactor projects at
existing nuclear power plants also benefit from existing power
transmission lines and historical environmental data for the required
environmental impact assessment. However, industry officials
acknowledge that public support is fragile and note that a nuclear accident
anywhere in the world could undermine this support.

27 _See_ 10 C.F.R. pt. 52.

28 Mining and processing of uranium and transporting of nuclear fuel result in some
greenhouse gas emissions. In addition, greenhouse gas emissions result from site
construction and worker transportation for both nuclear and renewable energy facilities.

**Page 36** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

A third challenge facing nuclear energy is the high capital costs to build
new nuclear reactors and a potential shortage of skilled workers. Nuclear
energy representatives expect a new nuclear power plant to cost between
$1.5 billion and $4 billion—more than double the cost of a comparably
sized conventional coal-fired plant. These costs may increase if (1)
transmission lines need to be installed or upgraded, (2) significant delays
occur during construction or start-up operations, and (3) lawsuits are filed
resulting in higher legal costs and delays. Although nuclear power plants
have relatively low operating costs and can operate at 90-percent capacity,
the overall cost of construction makes nuclear energy a high-cost option.
In addition, nuclear energy industry officials noted that a potential
shortage of skilled workers creates additional uncertainties over
construction schedules that could increase the cost of a new plant. With
the hiatus in nuclear power plant construction, industry officials have
expressed concerns that there may be a shortage of workers with the skills
critical to the construction of new nuclear power plants, particularly if
several utilities plan construction simultaneously.

The Energy Policy Act of 2005 has facilitated the construction of new
nuclear power reactors by providing a 1.8 cents/kilowatt-hour tax credit
for up to 6,000 megawatts of new nuclear energy capacity for the first 8
years of operation (up to $125 million per reactor). The Department of the
Treasury is to prescribe the process for allocating the tax credit in
consultation with the Secretary of Energy. In addition, the act authorizes
the Secretary of Energy to enter into six contracts with sponsors of
advanced nuclear facilities to ensure against certain delays in attaining
full-power operation and provide indemnification of (1) 100 percent of
covered costs, up to $500 million each for the first two reactors and (2) 50
percent of covered costs, up to $250 million each for the next four reactors
after an initial 180-day delay.

Recently, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and the
University of Chicago issued studies comparing nuclear power’s costs with
other forms of generating electricity. 29 Both studies concluded that,

assuming no unexpected costs or delays in licensing and construction,
nuclear power is only marginally competitive with conventional coal and
natural gas and, even then, only if the nuclear power industry significantly
reduces anticipated construction costs. The nuclear power industry has

29 MIT. _The Future of Nuclear Power_ (Cambridge, MA: July 2003); University of Chicago,
_The Economic Future of Nuclear Power_ (Chicago, IL: August 2004).

**Page 37** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

proposed constructing modular plants based on a set of reference designs
in the hopes of reducing construction costs. New technologies that use
more reliable and less expensive passive safety systems also can reduce
costs considerably compared with active safety systems currently used.
For example, several of the proposed nuclear reactors utilize less piping.
Despite the projected cost reductions, the MIT authors suggested that
investors would most likely prefer conventional coal or natural gas over
nuclear energy for generating electricity. Table 2 shows that without
substantial cost reductions, nuclear energy cannot compete with either
conventional coal or natural gas.

**Table 2: Comparison of Electricity Generating Costs Using Nuclear, Coal, and**
**Natural Gas Energy Sources**

Cents per kilowatt-hour

**Energy source** **25-year period** **40-year period**

Nuclear (base case) 7.0 6.7

Nuclear (best case) 4.7 4.4

Coal 4.4 4.2

Natural gas 4.9 5.1

Source: MIT.

Note: Costs were calculated using 2002 dollars and an 85 percent capacity factor using merchant
plant financing, reflecting a risk premium for nuclear energy. The best case for nuclear energy
assumes a 25-percent reduction in construction costs and a 12-month reduction in construction time.
The natural gas case assumes combined cycle turbine technology and a price that starts at
$4.50/million Btu and rises at a 2.5 percent rate over 40 years. Although natural gas prices were
lower in 2002 than today, construction and other costs have risen, resulting in a good measure of
relative costs, according to one of the MIT authors.

However, the MIT study found that if a tax on carbon emissions were
introduced, nuclear energy could become much more competitive because
conventional coal and natural gas power plants would be subject to the
tax while nuclear reactors would not because they do not emit carbon
dioxide during the generation of electricity (see table 3). Coal-based IGCC
plants could perform better than the conventional coal-fired power plants
in capturing and sequestering carbon dioxide emissions, but these plants
are considerably more expensive to build and operate than conventional
coal-fired plants. Part of DOE’s R&D efforts include reducing the cost of
construction of coal-based IGCC plants.

**Page 38** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

**Table 3: Comparison of Electricity Generating Costs Assuming a Carbon Emissions**
**Tax**

Cents per kilowatt-hour

**Energy source** **25-year period** **40-year period**

Nuclear (base case) 7.0 6.7

Nuclear (best case) 4.7 4.4

Coal ($50/ton carbon tax) 5.6 5.4

Coal ($100/ton carbon tax) 6.8 6.6

Natural gas ($50/ton carbon tax) 5.3 5.6

Natural gas ($100/ton carbon tax) 5.8 6.0

Source: MIT.

Note: Costs were calculated using 2002 dollars and an 85 percent capacity factor using merchant
plant financing, reflecting a risk premium for nuclear energy. The best case for nuclear energy
assumes a 25-percent reduction in construction costs and a 12-month reduction in construction time.
The natural gas case assumes combined cycle turbine technology and a price that starts at
$4.50/million Btu and rises at a 2.5 percent rate over 40 years. Although natural gas prices were
lower in 2002 than today, construction and other costs have risen, resulting in a good measure of
relative costs, according to one of the MIT authors.

The revival of the nuclear power industry is also challenged by uncertainty
about long-term disposal of commercial reactors’ spent nuclear fuel. DOE
reports that about 55,000 tons of commercial spent nuclear fuel—enough
to fill the area of a football field about 10 feet deep—currently sits in
interim storage at 72 sites in 33 states, mostly at operating reactor sites.
This spent fuel must be safely disposed of to protect the public and the
environment from harm because it will remain highly radioactive for
hundreds of thousands of years. The Atomic Energy Commission, DOE’s
predecessor, initially planned to recycle spent nuclear fuel to reduce the
amount of waste for disposal, but the 1970s recycling technology did not
address concerns that plutonium might be separated and diverted for use
in manufacturing nuclear weapons. The Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982
determined that the spent fuel should be disposed of in a deep geologic
repository; and, in 1987, an amendment to the act identified Yucca
Mountain, about 100 miles northwest of Las Vegas, Nevada, as the one site
that DOE should study further. However, DOE has extended the
repository’s commissioning date from the original 1998 target to 2017. 30 In

30 The Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982 originally set 1998 as the date for DOE to begin
accepting spent nuclear fuel for disposal. DOE has revised its estimate of the repository’s
opening first to 2010 and currently to 2017, characterized by DOE as a “best-achievable
schedule.”

**Page 39** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

addition, once the repository is completed, decades may be needed to
transport the spent fuel from various locations across the country to
Yucca Mountain. In the meantime, utilities continue interim storage of
spent nuclear fuel at operating reactor sites. 31

Many states have expressed alarm at the delays in opening Yucca
Mountain, fearing that the repository will suffer continual delays or might
never open, forcing the nuclear power plants to store the spent fuel
indefinitely. While the states are concerned about the public health and
environmental risks, especially with about 2,200 tons of spent nuclear fuel
being added to the national inventory annually, DOE and NRC cite a long
list of studies that indicate that the risks of radiation release from spent
fuel in interim storage in pools or in dry storage casks is low. 32 The states

fuel in interim storage in pools or in dry storage casks is low. 32 The states

are also concerned that Yucca Mountain project delays are resulting in
ongoing costs for the consumer because, under the Nuclear Waste Policy
Act, users of nuclear power generated electricity pay $0.001 per kilowatthour into a Nuclear Waste Fund, which is designed to pay for the
permanent disposal of all commercial spent nuclear fuel and high-level
waste, including the siting, licensing, and construction of a nuclear waste
repository. In fiscal year 2006, DOE reported $19.4 billion in the fund. DOE
reported that from project inception in fiscal year 1983 through fiscal year
2005 that it had spent approximately $11.7 billion (in real terms). 33

2005 that it had spent approximately $11.7 billion (in real terms). 33

Recently, DOE revised the start date from 2010 to 2017 and estimated that
the project would incur an additional $10.9 billion (in real terms) from
fiscal year 2006 to fiscal year 2017. According to the National Council of

31 NRC requires that utilities store spent nuclear fuel immersed in deep pools of water or in
dry storage casks consisting of all steel or steel and concrete. Currently, 37 commercial dry
storage facilities exist in 27 states. However, Private Fuel Storage in Utah, a facility
licensed to take waste from a consortium of commercial reactors, is not yet operational.
Two sites in Colorado and Idaho that are managed by DOE and store commercial spent
nuclear fuel from the Fort St. Vrain and Three Mile Island reactors, respectively, are not
included in this count.

32 NRC has determined that there is reasonable assurance that a geologic repository will be
open by 2025, giving it confidence that the nuclear waste issue will be resolved. In the
meantime, NRC testified that continued interim storage is considered safe. In February
2006, NRC licensed a centralized interim storage facility in Utah that the electric power
industry is pursuing to relieve congested spent fuel pools. However, there is no timetable
for construction.

33 Funding includes $8.3 billion from the Nuclear Waste Fund, $3 billion from defense waste,
and the remainder from various reprogramming actions. Both commercial spent nuclear
fuel and high-level defense waste are planned for disposal at Yucca Mountain.

**Page 40** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

State Legislatures, seven states have prohibited the construction of new
nuclear plants, citing the need to resolve the spent nuclear fuel issue.

Nuclear energy representatives also told us that another barrier facing
nuclear power is states’ opposition to transporting spent nuclear fuel.
Specifically, once Yucca Mountain opens, DOE expects to make about 175
shipments of spent nuclear fuel each year to Yucca Mountain, by both rail
and truck, over at least 24 years. Some states and public interest groups
have cited safety concerns if an incident occurred while the spent fuel was
near populated or environmentally sensitive areas. DOE and NRC officials
report that transportation casks have been certified to withstand severe
accidents and, according to numerous studies, have also been found to
withstand certain acts of sabotage and are considered safe for transporting
spent nuclear fuel.

In fiscal year 1999, DOE began R&D to develop proliferation-resistant
technology for reprocessing spent nuclear fuel. The new technology—
called uranium extraction or UREX—strives to keep plutonium mixed
with other highly radioactive elements. The resulting product can be used
as fuel in a fast reactor, but it would be very unattractive to proliferators
because the desired plutonium is mixed with thermally hot and highly
radioactive elements. The technology still needs to be demonstrated to
show that it can be cost competitive. In addition, while supporting the idea
of reprocessing spent fuel, industry representatives noted that
reprocessing technologies are technically challenging and very expensive
and would make nuclear energy less economic. DOE and industry
representatives have suggested that the reprocessing program, including
development of a fast reactor, could cost about $5 billion by 2012 and
could exceed $35 billion by 2050. DOE and NRC officials noted, however,
that the reprocessing program could delay the need for a second
repository, potentially saving money over the long term.

**Page 41** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

States Are Stimulating
Renewable Energy through
Standards, Mandates, and
Financial Incentives

Forty-five states have enacted legislation or developed initiatives to
stimulate the deployment of renewable energy technologies, primarily to
address their growing energy demand, reduce adverse impacts on the
environment, encourage local economic development, and/or provide a
reliable, diversified supply of electricity for residents. (See app. III for
states’ use of five types of standards, mandates, and financial incentives
for stimulating renewable energy.) As of 2006, (1) 39 states have
established interconnection and net metering rules that require electric
power companies to connect renewable energy sources to the power
transmission grid and credit, for example, the monthly electricity bill of
residents with solar-electric systems when they generate more power than
they use; 34 (2) 22 states have established renewable portfolio standards

(RPS) requiring or encouraging that a fixed percentage of the state’s
electricity be generated from renewable sources; and (3) 45 states offer
various tax credits, grants, or loans including, for example, exemptions
from the state sales tax for purchases of renewable energy equipment and
low- or no-interest loans for the purchase of renewable energy equipment.
As shown in figure 5, states in the West, Northeast, and Midwest are
leading many of these efforts.

34 The Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978, (Pub. L. No. 95-617, (1978)) requires
that utilities buy excess energy generated by small energy producers. The states determine
its minimum purchase price.

**Page 42** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

**Figure 5: Distribution of State Incentives and Policies for Renewable Energy**

have a collective budget over 500 times greater than the budget for the single rebate program
administered by Minnesota.

Many states have adopted various standards, mandates, and financial
incentives to stimulate the deployment of renewable energy technologies
by offsetting their high startup costs. The following are two examples of
states’ initiatives:

**Page 43** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

In 2002, New Mexico enacted a production tax credit of 1 cent per
kilowatt-hour for companies that generate electricity from wind, solar, or
biomass. In February 2006, New Mexico enacted a 30-percent personal
income tax credit (up to $9,000) for residents who purchase and install
photovoltaic or solar thermal systems. New Mexico also has net-metering
and interconnection rules, which address connecting renewable energy
sources to the power transmission grid and crediting producers for excess
power generation.

Since 2004, Massachusetts has provided $2.5 million annually in grants to
consumers who install qualified clean-energy technologies under the
state’s RPS. These technologies include solar thermal electric power,
photovoltaics, and wind generation. Massachusetts also has net-metering
and interconnection rules.

Figure 6 shows the number of states that provide each of 12 incentives we
reviewed to stimulate renewable energy

**Page 44** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

**Figure 6: Number of States Using Each of 12 Renewable Standards, Mandates, and**
**Incentives**

**Interconnection**

**Net metering**

**Property tax**

**Renewable portfolio**
**standard**

**Loans**

**Grants**

**Rebates**

**Sales tax**

**Corporate tax**

**Personal tax**

**Public benefit fund**

**Production incentive**

**0** **5** **10** **15** **20** **25** **30** **35**

**Number of states**

Source: Database of State Incentives for Renewable Energy maintained by the Interstate Renewable Energy Council.

Note: Net metering and interconnection refer to eligibility and pricing rules for connecting renewable
energy sources to the power transmission grid and for crediting producers for excess generation. A
public benefit fund is a general fund to support renewable energy resources, energy efficiency
initiatives, and renewable energy projects for low-income residents, supported by a small surcharge
on each consumer’s electricity bill.

In addition to specific incentives and policies, some states have
implemented statewide programs to stimulate the deployment of advanced
renewable energy technologies. Three examples of states’ efforts are
described as follows (see app. IV for further details):

Since 1980, Minnesota has provided mandates and production incentives
to stimulate ethanol production. In particular, Minnesota (1) established
an incentive in 1986 that paid ethanol producers 20 cents per gallon over
10 years and (2) mandated in 2003 that all gasoline sold in the state contain

**Page 45** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

at least 10-percent ethanol. In 2004, Minnesota’s governor proposed raising
this mandate to 20 percent. As a result, the state is now home to one-third
of the nation’s E85 (85 percent ethanol and 15 percent gasoline) stations
and has replaced nearly 10 percent of all its gasoline consumption with
ethanol.

                  In 2005, Texas enacted legislation that extended its 1999 RPS to require
the installation of 5,000 megawatts of new renewable capacity—in
addition to 880 megawatts of existing renewable capacity—by 2015. The
Texas RPS represents 5 percent of the state’s electricity demand. Electric
power retailers that do not comply with RPS requirements are subject to
penalties of up to $50 per megawatt-hour, or 5 cents per kilowatt-hour.
Moreover, to ensure a wide variety of renewable projects, the Texas RPS
requires that 500 megawatts of new capacity come from renewable
sources other than wind. According to the Electric Reliability Council of
Texas, Inc., as of September 2006, Texas had installed over 1,900
megawatts of new renewable energy, representing about 3 percent of its
total electricity consumption.

                  In 2006, California enacted a $2.2 billion solar initiative to support the
governor’s goal to install 3,000 megawatts of new solar energy by 2017. In
particular, the initiative provides rebates for new photovoltaic and solar
thermal systems, and pay-for-performance incentives that reward highperforming solar systems (greater than 100 kilowatts). The initiative also
sets aside 10 percent of its funding to subsidize solar energy for lowincome and affordable housing projects. According to a state official,
California has already installed more than 150 megawatts of new solar
energy capacity.

Some States Are Offering In addition to the investment tax credits and loan guarantees that the
Incentives to Encourage Energy Policy Act of 2005 authorizes for the deployment of fossil and
the Deployment of New nuclear technologies, some states have enacted financial incentives and

requirements to further stimulate the deployment of advanced fossil and

Fossil and Nuclear Energy

nuclear technologies that support state needs and goals. For example,

Technologies

Indiana enacted legislation in 2002 to provide financial incentives for clean
coal projects using Illinois Basin coal or gas and extended these incentives
in 2005 by establishing investment tax credits for state investments in
IGCC power plants. Similarly, Pennsylvania’s Energy Deployment for a
Growing Economy program provides low-interest loans for IGCC plants in
an effort to build advanced coal plants that use coals abundant to the

state.

**Page 46** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

The Countries We

Reviewed Have Stimulated
the Development and
Deployment of Advanced
Renewable, Fossil, and
Nuclear Energy
Technologies

Brazil Has Displaced 40
Percent of Its Gasoline
Consumption with Ethanol

However, states provide far fewer incentives for fossil and nuclear
technologies—both in variety and number—than for renewable energy
technologies. As of 2006, only seven states had incentives for coal
gasification and IGCC technologies, according to the National Conference
of State Legislatures. We found no national database on states’ nuclear
incentives, although industry officials said that states or localities may
offer a variety of economic incentives to attract large businesses, such as a
nuclear power plant.

An industry association official noted that states may have an important
influence over regulatory incentives for fossil plants, such as requiring
new coal-fired plants to employ mercury removal technologies. For
example, Idaho has stopped construction on all conventional pulverized
coal-fired power plants until the state finishes researching the possibility
of building new gasification plants that significantly reduce mercury
emissions. Similarly, while industry officials say state and local incentives
for new nuclear plants—the most common of which are property tax
breaks—do not significantly impact the high costs of plants, states may
have an indirect impact on encouraging or discouraging the construction
of new nuclear plants. For example, seven states specifically discourage or
prohibit the construction of new nuclear plants until methods of waste
disposal are determined. In contrast, some states and localities may send
more positive signs about nuclear energy by offering economic
enticements. For instance, Calvert County, Maryland, recently offered a
50-percent, 15-year property tax credit to the Calvert Cliffs nuclear power
plant’s owner if another nuclear reactor is built.

We identified six countries—Brazil, Denmark, Germany, Japan, Spain, and
France—that illustrate a range of financial initiatives and mandates to
stimulate the development and deployment of advanced renewable, fossil,
and nuclear energy technologies. For example, successful use of financial
incentives and/or mandates has enabled Germany to generate 10.2 percent
of its electricity from renewable sources and Denmark to generate 19
percent of its electricity from wind technologies, surpassing the United
States in the percentage of electricity derived from renewable sources.

In 1975, in response to oil price shocks, Brazil initiated a program to
replace imported oil with ethanol produced from domestic sugarcane to
power vehicles. To stimulate its ethanol industry, Brazil (1) required its
major oil company, Petrobras, to purchase a guaranteed amount of
ethanol; (2) provided $4.9 billion in low-interest loans to the agricultural
and industrial sectors to stimulate ethanol production for transportation

**Page 47** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

Denmark’s Wind Energy
Generates 19 Percent of Its
Electricity

use; (3) provided subsidies so ethanol’s price at the pump was 59 percent
of the price of gasoline; and (4) required that all fuels be blended with a
minimum of 22 percent ethanol (called E22 fuel). Brazil removed its price
supports for ethanol in 2000, when it deregulated the ethanol market, but
still requires that all fuels be blended with 20 to 25 percent ethanol,
depending on market conditions. Moreover, to receive an operating
license, all fueling stations must provide an ethanol or ethanol-blend
pump. In 2003, the Brazilian government introduced flex-fuel cars—which
can run on ethanol, gasoline, or a blend of the two, thus allowing
consumers to choose which fuel to use based on the current oil and

ethanol prices—further encouraging the consumption of ethanol.

As of 2005, Brazil was the world’s ethanol leader, producing 4.2 billion
gallons of ethanol per year, or 47 percent of the world’s supply. Brazil no
longer needs to import crude oil for transportation, saving an estimated
$1.8 billion per year by displacing 40 percent of its gasoline
consumption—200,000 barrels of oil per day—with ethanol, according to
Brazilian experts. In comparison, the United States produced 3.9 billion
gallons of ethanol in 2005, displacing about 3 percent of gasoline
consumption. By 2011, Brazil’s ethanol production is expected to increase
to 27 billion gallons per year—a more than 600 percent increase—from
efficiency improvements and land expansion. With the introduction of
flex-fuel cars, consumer confidence in ethanol consumption has grown
significantly, according to Brazilian embassy officials. As a result, more
than 70 percent of cars sold in Brazil today run on ethanol or ethanol
blends, and according to Brazil’s former Secretary of Environment,
ethanol is now fully competitive with international gas prices—sold for 60
to 70 percent of the price of gasoline at the pump.

Brazil has also significantly improved its environmental profile by
replacing oil with ethanol in the transportation sector. From 1975 to 2000,
for instance, the use of ethanol in cars saved 100 million tons of carbon
emissions, according to Brazilian authorities. In addition, ethanol
production has helped Brazil become more self-sufficient in electricity. In
particular, by burning sugarcane waste, mills have been able to generate
energy surpluses of around 600 megawatts per crop season, allowing them
to be completely self-sufficient in electricity, and in some cases, to export
electricity abroad.

Successive Danish governments have committed to a series of national
energy plans aimed at reducing dependency on imported fuels, improving
the environment, and moving toward greater sustainability. As a result,
since 1980 there has been general consensus in Denmark that renewable

**Page 48** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

technologies—and especially wind energy—require special support to gain
an advantage in the market. Specifically, the Danish government has (1)
conducted R&D in wind turbine technologies since the 1970’s; (2) provided
investment subsidies for 30 percent of the installation cost of wind
turbines until 1990; and (3) required that electric power companies
purchase wind energy from private producers at a fixed price until 1999,
when the obligation moved to electricity consumers paying for all
increased costs associated with wind power. In addition, the government
exempts wind generators from a carbon dioxide tax, 35 gives wind power

priority access to the electric power grid, and has established regulations
for building wind turbines.

In 2005, renewable energy accounted for approximately 28 percent of the
Danish electricity supply, including 19 percent from wind power—the
highest percentage in the world. Since 1980, more than 6,000 wind turbines
have been established in Denmark. From 2001 to 2003, a repowering
program led to approximately 1,500 smaller wind turbines being replaced
by approximately 300 new and larger wind turbines, which together have
tripled the capacity. At the end of 2005, Denmark had 3,122 megawatts of
installed wind power capacity—more than the 2,631 megawatts of the
installed capacity in Texas, the nation’s leader in wind power.

Denmark’s long-term support of wind energy has fostered a thriving wind
turbine industry, with global sales increasing over the last decade from
about 200 megawatts of capacity per year to more than 3,000 megawatts
per year. Danish wind turbine manufacturers accounted for about 40
percent of global sales in 2004, providing about 20,000 jobs domestically,
or 4 percent of Danish industrial production. In particular, Denmark is a
world leader in offshore wind power development. Denmark built the first
offshore wind farm in 1991 and had eight operating offshore wind farms by
the end of 2005. Two additional offshore wind farms are planned to supply
electricity to 350,000 to 400,000 households, or about 4 percent of the total
Danish electricity consumption. 36 As a result of its experience, Denmark

has gained extensive technical knowledge in how to integrate wind power
into the overall electricity system, how to combine wind power with other
sources of energy to maintain the electrical system’s stability, and how to

35 Renewable technology plants are exempt from taxes placed on power plants that emit
carbon dioxide.

36 One of the new offshore developments, Horns Rev II, is expected to be operational by
2009.

**Page 49** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

Germany’s Renewable Energy
Technologies Generate 10
Percent of Its Electricity

develop offshore wind farms—including the logistics of transporting,
installing, and maintaining wind turbines at sea.

In 2000, the German government enacted the Renewable Energy Sources
Act to accelerate the growth of renewable energy technologies in the
German electricity market. It amended the act in 2004 to increase country
targets for renewable technologies and further develop the framework
conditions for renewable technologies. 37 The Renewable Energy Sources

Act requires electricity grid operators to purchase electricity generated
from renewable energy technologies and establishes minimum rates for it.
Germany’s goal is to increase the share of renewable energy consumption
to at least 4.2 percent of its total energy requirements by 2010, 10 percent
by 2020, and at least 50 percent by 2050. The target for 2010 was exceeded
in 2005, when renewable technologies accounted for 4.6 percent of
consumption. The German government is also offering tax relief for
biofuels and financial support for constructing plants that generate heat
and/or electricity from renewable energy sources. In response, Germany
has more than doubled its electricity consumption from renewable energy
sources—from 4.8 percent in 1998 to 10.2 percent in 2005. In particular,
Germany generated about 1 billion kilowatt-hours of solar electricity in
2005, tripling the generation of electricity from solar cells in 2 years.
Germany has also become the world leader in wind energy with 18,428
megawatts of installed wind capacity that produced 26.5 terawatt-hours of
electricity in 2005.

Under the Kyoto Protocol and as a member of the European Union,
Germany has committed to a 21-percent reduction in the 1990 baseline
year’s greenhouse gas emissions from 2008 to 2012. The German
government believes the Renewable Energy Sources Act is one of
Germany’s most effective and efficient instruments for climate protection,
stating that using renewable energy technologies prevented the emission
of approximately 84 million tons of carbon dioxide in 2005. The
government also states that renewable energy technologies have created
jobs in Germany—the renewables sector had 157,000 jobs in 2004,
including 64,000 jobs in wind power, 57,000 jobs in biomass, and 25,000 in
the solar industry. The government estimates that renewable energy jobs

37 The German government also amended the Atomic Energy Act in 2002, which will
systematically decommission the nation’s existing nuclear power plants once the volume of
electricity specified for each plant is generated—the last nuclear power plant in Germany is
estimated to shut down about 2020.

**Page 50** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

Japan Has Installed over 931
Megawatts of Residential Solar
Systems

Spain Began Operating an
IGCC Coal Gasification Plant in

1997

increased to 170,000 in 2005, and German industry estimates that this
number will grow to more than 255,000 by 2010.

In 1994, Japan launched a 10-year residential solar project as part of its
efforts to deploy domestic energy technologies that would diversify its
energy portfolio and reduce its dependence on energy imports. 38 The goal

of the residential solar project was to reduce the cost of photovoltaics and
promote installation of solar systems in residential communities. Initially,
the Japanese government provided a subsidy covering 50 percent of the
cost of installing a residential solar system. This percentage subsequently
dropped to 33 percent and eventually became a fixed amount as the 10year project matured. As a result of the project, over 253,000 homes
installed solar systems that collectively generate over 931 megawatts of
power. Even though the government subsidy decreased, the number of
systems installed increased considerably year by year, as the installation
price decreased. According to a solar manufacturer, the cost of installing a
solar system dropped from about $16,000 per kilowatt in 1994 to about
$6,000 per kilowatt when the project ended. Due to the successful
transformation of the photovoltaic market, Japanese homeowners
continue to buy and install solar systems without the government subsidy.

The 10-year residential solar project has also helped create a Japanese
solar industry that has become a world leader in the photovoltaic market.
According to the European Commission, Japanese manufacturers’ share of
the world photovoltaic market is now greater than 40 percent. The
residential solar project also enables the Japanese government to fulfill its
commitment to increase its share of renewables in its energy portfolio to
about 3 percent by 2010 and reduce its greenhouse gas emissions under
the Kyoto Protocol.

In the early 1990s, the European Union and the Spanish government
collaborated to construct the world’s largest coal-based IGCC plant in
Puertollano, Spain, to improve the efficiency, cost, and environmental
profile of coal-based power plants. The 320-megawatt IGCC plant, which
began generating electricity from coal in 1998, is operated by a consortium
of eight utilities from France, Germany, Italy, Portugal, Spain, and the
United Kingdom as part of a European Union program to demonstrate

38 About half of Japan’s total energy demand is for oil, which is primarily imported from the
Middle East.

**Page 51** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

France’s Advanced Nuclear
Reactor Is Scheduled to Begin
Operations in 2012

energy technologies that promote clean coal and reduce the European
Union’s dependency on natural gas.

The European Union and the Spanish government supported the
construction of the Puertollano plant by subsidizing about 8.5 percent of
its nearly $900 million cost. European consortium members noted that, in
comparison, DOE can fund up to 50 percent of the cost of commercial
IGCC demonstration projects. In 2000, the Puertollano plant produced
nearly 1 million megawatts of electricity using synthetic gas. The
Puertollano plant is expected to operate at over 45 percent efficiency and
eliminate 99.9 percent of sulfur dioxide emissions. DOE plans to achieve
efficiencies and emissions levels comparable to the Puertollano plant by
2010—currently, U.S. IGCC plants are about 40-percent efficient and
eliminate 98 percent of sulfur dioxide emissions.

In response to the oil price shocks in 1973, France decided to reduce its
reliance on oil-fired power plants to generate electricity by launching a
nuclear initiative designed to make nuclear power a primary source of
electricity. France built 56 nuclear reactors during the 1970s and 1980s
and, according to the International Energy Agency, spent about 90 percent
of its energy R&D funding on nuclear energy from 1985 through 2001. The
French government reported that its R&D efforts during this time focused
on technological improvements and safety, as well as development of a
fast reactor. Today, France has 58 nuclear reactors generating 75 to 80
percent of its electricity.

France does not license reactors for a specific amount of time, but
conducts reviews every 10 years to grant continued operational authority.
Reactors are expected to operate for about 40 years. Some interest groups
in France have called for an end to nuclear energy, citing radioactive
waste and safety issues and noting that Germany has decided to phase out
of nuclear energy and close down its reactors. However, the French
government has maintained its support for nuclear energy, deciding in a
2005 law to keep the nuclear option open for the future and planning to
potentially replace its current reactors with a new generation of reactors
designed to be more efficient, safer, and less susceptible to external
threats. As part of this effort, France has developed the European
Pressurized Reactor, which uses Generation III technology and will be
capable of generating 1,600 megawatts of electricity, a significant increase
over the capacity of existing reactors, which range from 900 megawatts to
1,450 megawatts. Two European Pressurized Reactors are under
construction—one in Flammanville, France, scheduled to be operational
in 2012 and a second in Finland scheduled to be operational in 2009.

**Page 52** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

Conclusions

France is one of 13 partners in the Generation IV International Forum that
collaborates on R&D to develop next generation nuclear reactor
technologies. France is conducting R&D on several nuclear reactors,
including the sodium-cooled fast reactor that is a critical element of the
U.S. GNEP program. In addition, France has provided U.S. researchers
with access to the French Phenix fast reactor to study how highly
radioactive nuclear fuel might be converted to less radiotoxic material.

It is unlikely that DOE’s current level of R&D funding or the nation’s
current energy policies will be sufficient to deploy alternative energy
sources in the next 25 years that will reverse our growing dependence on
imported oil or the adverse environmental effects of using conventional
fossil energy. The United States has generally relied on market forces to
determine the nation’s energy portfolio, primarily conventional supplies of
oil, natural gas, coal, and nuclear energy. In contrast, advanced energy
technologies have higher up-front capital costs that make them less cost
competitive than conventional technologies. As a result, despite periodic
energy price spikes caused by disruptive world events and about $50
billion (in real terms) in energy R&D funding since 1978, the United States
has made only steady incremental progress in developing and deploying
advanced renewable, coal, and nuclear technologies that can compete
with conventional energy technologies. However, continued reliance on
conventional technologies leaves the United States vulnerable to crude oil
supply disruptions, with economic, energy security, and national security

consequences.

The nation is once again assessing how best to stimulate the deployment
of advanced energy technologies in response to recent high energy
prices—caused by the growing world demand for energy, wars in the
Middle East, and last year’s hurricanes—and concerns about the adverse
environmental effects, particularly greenhouse gas emissions, of using
conventional fossil energy. Reducing the nation’s dependence on oil and
carbon dioxide emissions in the next 25 years is not unlike the 1960s
challenge to put a man on the moon. Without sustained high energy prices
or concerted, high-profile federal government leadership, U.S. consumers
are unlikely to change their energy-use patterns, and the United States will
continue to rely upon its current energy portfolio. Specifically, government
leadership is needed to overcome technological and market barriers to
deploying advanced energy technologies that would reduce the nation’s
vulnerability to oil supply disruptions and the adverse environmental
effects of burning fossil fuels.

**Page 53** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

The nation’s current energy portfolio has raised concerns about the
adverse environmental effects of energy generation—particularly
greenhouse gas emissions from coal-fired and oil-fired power plants and
the long-term storage of spent nuclear fuel. In addition, the duration of
certain federal tax incentives has been insufficient to stimulate investment

decisions to deploy advanced energy technologies. For example,
renewable energy industry representatives have stated that the 2-year
extension of the production tax credit in the Energy Policy Act of 2005
does not provide sufficient certainty to stimulate investment. In providing
a production tax credit to stimulate the construction of projects using
advanced technologies, the credit’s duration is key to encouraging
companies and their lenders to undertake the substantial investments and
build an industry over time.

Several states have taken the lead in encouraging the deployment of
advanced energy technologies, particularly in renewable energy. For
example, in the past 7 years, Texas tripled its renewable energy use as a
result of its renewable portfolio standard. Similarly, Minnesota’s ethanol
program has displaced 10 percent of gasoline consumption with ethanol.
Many other states have initiatives to stimulate renewable energy
generation as well. States’ initiatives that diversify our energy portfolio
and reduce harmful emissions are positive steps. Similarly, foreign
countries, including Brazil, Denmark, and Germany, have sustained longterm efforts using mandates and/or financial incentives to deploy
advanced energy technologies that are providing, or are expected in the
future to provide, significant amounts of energy. Approaches taken by
these countries may provide useful insights and opportunities for fostering
the deployment of advanced energy technologies.

Agency Comments

We provided DOE with a draft of this report for its review and comment.
In its written response, DOE did not comment on our recommendation to
the Congress. (See app. V.) DOE provided technical comments, which we
have incorporated as appropriate.

**Page 54** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

As arranged with your offices, unless you publicly announce its contents
earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the
report date. At that time, we will send copies to interested congressional
committees, the Secretary of Energy, the Director of the Office of
Management and Budget, and other interested parties. We will also make
copies available to others upon request. In addition, the report will be
[available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov.](http://www.gao.gov/)

If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact
me at (202) 512-3841 or wellsj@gao.gov. Contact points for our Offices of
Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page
of this report. GAO staff who made major contributions to this report are
listed in appendix VI.

Jim Wells

Director, Natural Resources
and Environment

**Page 55** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

**Appendix I: Estimated Federal Tax**
**Expenditures Targeted at Energy Suppliers**
#### Appendix I: Estimated Federal Tax and Users, Fiscal Year 2006 Expenditures Targeted at Energy Suppliers and Users, Fiscal Year 2006

Dollars in millions

**Estimated**

**FY 2006**

**revenue loss**

**Federal tax expenditures targeted at energy suppliers and users** **a** **Budget function**

**First**
**year** **b**

1 Capital gains treatment of royalties on coal Energy 1974 $90

2 Excess of percentage over cost depletion, fuels Energy 1974 670

3 Expensing of exploration and development costs, fuels Energy 1974 680

4 New technology credits (addresses energy production from several
technologies, including wind and solar energy)

Energy 1978 510

5 Alcohol fuel credits

c Energy 1980 40

6 Alternative fuel production credit Energy 1980 2,390

7 Exclusion of interest on energy facility bonds Energy 1980 90

8 Exception from passive loss limitation for working interests in oil and gas
properties

Energy 1988 40

9 Tax credit and deduction for clean-fuel burning vehicles Energy 1992 90

10 Enhanced oil recovery credit Energy 1994 0

11 Credit for holding clean renewable energy bonds Energy 2005 0

12 Deferral of gain from dispositions of transmission property to implement the Energy 2005 620
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission’s restructuring policy d

13 Credit for production from advanced nuclear power facilities Energy 2005 0

14 Credit for investment in clean coal facilities Energy 2005 50

15 Temporary 50 percent expensing for equipment used in the refining of liquid
fuels

Energy 2005 10

16 Pass through low sulfur diesel expensing to cooperative owners Energy 2005 0

17 Natural gas distribution pipelines treated as 15-year property Energy 2005 20

18 Amortize all geological and geophysical expenditures over 2 years Energy 2005 40

19 30 percent credit for residential purchases/installations of solar and fuel cells Energy 2005 10

20 Credit for business installation of qualified fuel cells and stationary
microturbine power plants

Energy 2005 80

21 Alternative Fuel and Fuel Mixture tax credit Energy 2005 170

22 Bio-Diesel and small agri-biodiesel producer tax credits Agriculture 2004 90

23 Expensing of small refiner capital costs with respect to complying with EPA
sulfur regulations

Natural resources

and environment

2004 10

**Total estimated tax expenditures** **e** **$5,700**

Source: GAO analysis of tax expenditures reported by the Department of the Treasury.

Note: For descriptions of tax expenditures, see Office of Management and Budget. Analytical
Perspectives, Budget of the United States Government, Fiscal Year 2007, (Washington, D.C.: 2005).

**Page 56** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

**Appendix I: Estimated Federal Tax**
**Expenditures Targeted at Energy Suppliers**
**and Users, Fiscal Year 2006**

a This list does not include five tax expenditures whose primary focus is energy conservation—
exclusion of utility conservation subsidies, deduction for certain energy efficient commercial building
property as well as tax credits for construction of new energy efficient homes, energy efficiency
improvements to existing homes, and energy efficient appliances—with revenue loss estimates
summing to $510 million for fiscal year 2006. This list also does not include tax incentives for general
research and development available for all businesses. Also, the Department of Treasury does not
report tax expenditures with revenue losses below $5 million.

b First year the Department of the Treasury reported expenditures.

c The alcohol fuel credit includes, among other things, the volumetric tax credit for ethanol, which was
enacted in 2004. Treasury estimates a $2.1 billion reduction in excise tax receipts in fiscal year 2006
as a result of income tax revenue losses and reduced excise tax receipts.

d This tax expenditure was listed under the community and regional development budget function in
2004.

e Summing tax expenditure estimates does not take into account interactions between individual
provisions.

**Page 57** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

#### Appendix II: Scope and Methodology Appendix II: Scope and Methodology

To review the Department of Energy’s (DOE) research and development
(R&D) funding trends, we analyzed DOE budget authority data for
renewable, fossil, and nuclear energy R&D from fiscal year 1978 through
fiscal year 2006. The data consist of DOE’s annual appropriations, adjusted
for any advanced appropriations and rescissions. To assess the reliability
of these data, we interviewed DOE program managers and budget officials
with oversight of each of the technologies. We asked DOE officials a series
of data reliability questions, including questions covering data
classification, particularly over time; program changes that could impact
data classification or budget accounts; custody and maintenance of the
data, including updates; quality control procedures; and accuracy and
completeness of the data. Where appropriate, we adjusted the data to
ensure consistency in reporting over time. We obtained historical
documents, program plans, and assessments from other entities to
corroborate the data. We determined that the data were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes of this report. In addition to DOE’s R&D funding,
we reviewed revenue losses from energy-related tax expenditures for
fiscal years 2000 through 2006 by reviewing tax expenditure revenue loss
estimates prepared by the Department of the Treasury and published in
the President’s annual budget. While the aggregate value for energy-related
tax expenditures is useful for gauging their general magnitude, summing
does not take into account interactions between individual provisions. We
excluded annual tax expenditures below $5 million because Treasury does
not report them. To review DOE’s strategy for developing advanced energy
technologies, we reviewed DOE documents, including strategic plans,
program plans, and studies on each of the technologies. We also collected
and analyzed documents from industry and industry associations. In
addition, we interviewed senior DOE managers, program managers and
scientists at DOE laboratories, senior power company and industry
association executives, and independent experts.

To assess the key technological, economic, and other barriers to
developing and deploying new energy technologies, we analyzed various
documents from DOE, including program plans, energy studies and
assessments, and key budget documents, including supporting
documentation justifying budget requests. We also analyzed documents
from other federal agencies; utilities; industry associations; state utility
commissions and associations; and independent experts, including studies
from the Electric Power Research Institute, the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, and the University of Chicago. We interviewed DOE and NRC
officials; program managers and scientists at DOE laboratories; executives
of utilities, manufacturers, and industry associations; public utility

**Page 58** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

**Appendix II: Scope and Methodology**

commissions from various states; and selected state governments and
government associations.

To examine the efforts of states to develop and deploy advanced energy
technologies, we analyzed reports and assessments from DOE, various
state governments and associations, industry and industry associations,
and independent experts. We also used the Database of State Incentives
for Renewable Energy, maintained by the Interstate Renewable Energy
Council, to analyze state initiatives and select three states with successful
initiatives—Texas’ renewable portfolio standards, Minnesota’s ethanol
program, and California’s solar programs. To assess the reliability of this
database, we reviewed relevant documentation and obtained responses
from the database administrator to a series of data reliability questions
covering issues such as data entry, access, quality control procedures, and
the accuracy and completeness of the data. We determined that the data
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report. In addition to the
database, we collected documents and interviewed officials from DOE;
industry and industry associations; and various state organizations,
including the National Conference of State Legislatures and the Western
Governor’s Association; and selected public utility commissions.

To develop a nonprobability sample of countries that have developed and
deployed advanced renewable, fossil, and nuclear technologies, we (1)
reviewed the Energy Information Administration’s (EIA) international data
to identify significant changes in consumption patterns among renewable,
fossil, and nuclear energy technologies; (2) examined other related
information; and (3) interviewed cognizant DOE officials and independent
industry experts. 1 We selected Brazil, Denmark, France, Germany, Japan,

and Spain because they have initiated major efforts to deploy advanced
energy technologies that could change their energy portfolios. To obtain
information on each country’s initiatives, we analyzed documents from
EIA, the International Energy Agency, each of the countries, and
independent experts. We also interviewed DOE officials; officials from
each country, either at their U.S. embassy or by telephone or e-mail; and
independent experts.

1 Results from a nonprobability sample cannot be used to make inferences about a
population because in a nonprobability sample some elements of the population being
studied have no chance or an unknown chance of being selected as part of the sample.

**Page 59** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

**Appendix II: Scope and Methodology**

We conducted our work from October 2005 through October 2006 in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.

**Page 60** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

**Appendix III: The States’ Use of Renewable**
**Energy Incentives, Standards, and Mandates**
#### Appendix III: The States’ Use of Renewable Energy Incentives, Standards, and Mandates

**Net metering & inter**
**d** **connection rules** **e**

**Renewable portfolio**
**c** **standards** **d**

**e**

**State** **Tax credits**

**a** **Rebates**

**Public benefit**
**b** **funds** **c**

Alabama 

Alaska

Arizona - 

Arkansas 

California - - - - 

Colorado - 

Connecticut - - - 

Delaware - - - 

Florida 

Georgia 

Hawaii - - 

Idaho 

Illinois - - 

Indiana 

Iowa - - 

Kansas 

Kentucky 

Louisiana 

Maine - - - 

Maryland - - - 

Massachusetts - - - - 

Michigan 

Minnesota - - - 

Mississippi

Missouri - 

Montana - - - 

Nebraska

Nevada - - 

New Hampshire 

New Jersey - - - 

New Mexico - - 

New York - - - - 

North Carolina - 

North Dakota - 

Ohio - - 

**Page 61** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

**Appendix III: The States’ Use of Renewable**
**Energy Incentives, Standards, and Mandates**

**Net metering & inter**
**d** **connection rules** **e**

**Renewable portfolio**
**c** **standards** **d**

**e**

**State** **Tax credits**

**a** **Rebates**

**Public benefit**
**b** **funds** **c**

Oklahoma - 

Oregon - - - 

Pennsylvania - - 

Rhode Island - - - - 

South Carolina 

South Dakota

Tennessee

Texas - - 

Utah - 

Vermont - - 

Virginia 

Washington 

West Virginia 

Wisconsin - - - 

Wyoming - 

**Total** **21** **17** **15** **22** **39**

Source: GAO analysis of the Database of State Incentives for Renewable Energy, maintained by the Interstate Renewable Energy
Council.

a Provided to corporations or individuals that purchase or install renewable energy equipment. For
example, New Mexico offers a 30-percent personal income tax credit (up to $9,000) for residents who
install photovoltaic or solar thermal systems. Tax credits are one of the most frequently used statelevel financial incentives.

b Typically provided in the form of cash rebates to residents and businesses for the purchase and
installation of renewable energy equipment. For example, New York provides $4 to $4.50 per watt to
eligible installers for the installation of approved, grid-connected photovoltaic systems.

c A surcharge on each consumer’s electricity bill that goes into a general fund to support renewable
energy resources, energy efficiency initiatives, and renewable energy projects for low-income
residents. For example, Connecticut residents are charged up to 0.1 cents per kilowatt-hour on their
utility bills, which provides funding for Connecticut’s Energy Efficiency Fund for energy efficiency and
Clean Energy Fund for renewable energy.

d Require that a fixed percentage of the state’s electricity be generated from renewable sources. For
example, Texas enacted legislation in 2005 requiring the installation of 5,000 megawatts of new
renewable capacity by 2015. According to the National Conference of State Legislatures, renewable
portfolio standards have been particularly successful in encouraging wind power development.

e Eligibility and pricing rules for connecting renewable energy sources to the power transmission grid
and crediting producers for excess generation. For example, the value of energy generated in excess
of what is used is subtracted from the monthly utility bill of residents in Arizona with solar-electric
systems.

**Page 62** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

**Appendix IV: Three States’ Initiatives to**
**Stimulate the Use of Renewable Energy**
#### Appendix IV: Three States’ Initiatives to Technologies Stimulate the Use of Renewable Energy Technologies

**Appendix IV: Three States’ Initiativ**
**Stimulate the Use of Renewable Energy**
**Technologies**

**es to**
**late the Use of Renewable Energy**
**nologies**

Minnesota’s Ethanol
Program

Minnesota, Texas, and California have implemented programs to stimulate
the use of renewable energy technologies. In response to various
incentives and mandates, Minnesota now has one-third of the nation’s
ethanol fueling stations and had displaced nearly 10 percent of its gasoline
consumption with ethanol by June 2006. Since Texas enacted renewable
portfolio standards (RPS) in 1999, its electric power companies have
installed over 1,900 megawatts of new renewable energy capacity—
approximately 3 percent of the state’s total electricity generation. Since
California began its Solar Initiative in January 2006, over 150 megawatts of
new solar capacity have been installed.

Minnesota’s Ethanol Program began in 1980 as an effort to expand the
state’s farm economy by building a new market for corn, its largest crop;
meet EPA standards for air quality in the Twin Cities area by reducing
carbon monoxide emissions from cars; and reduce dependence on
imported oil. To reach these goals, Minnesota established financial
incentives and mandates to encourage the development of a state ethanol
industry over a 17-year period. As of June 2006, ethanol had displaced
nearly 10 percent of Minnesota’s gasoline consumption.

The Minnesota Ethanol Program encouraged growth in the state’s ethanol
industry, primarily through the use of producer incentives and mandated
ethanol blends. In particular, state legislation passed in 1980 provided a
tax credit for gasoline that was blended with 10-percent ethanol, and in
1986, the state set up a producer payment incentive that paid ethanol
producers 20 cents per gallon for a 10-year period. Legislation enacted in
1992 required that all gasoline offered for sale in the state be blended with
7.7 percent ethanol beginning in 1997. This provision was amended in 2003
to require blends to contain at least 10 percent ethanol. In 1995, Minnesota
also established a statutory goal to develop over 200 million gallons of
ethanol production. The tax credits were eliminated in 1997, and the
producer incentive payments were phased out beginning in the late 1990s. 1

In 2004, Minnesota enacted legislation doubling the requirement to 20
percent by 2013.

1 Some payments are still being made to producers that qualified for the program prior to
1999. However, these payments are now less than 20 percent and are being continuously
phased out.

**Page 63** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

Texas’ Renewable

Portfolio Standards

**Appendix IV: Three States’ Initiatives to**
**Stimulate the Use of Renewable Energy**
**Technologies**

Currently, nearly all gasoline in Minnesota is blended with 10-percent
ethanol, representing over $100 million in annual savings on oil imports.
Ethanol production has expanded from 1.5 million gallons in 1987 to a
current capacity of over 500 million gallons. Corn prices have also doubled
to 30 cents a bushel, and the Twin Cities area is in compliance with EPA
air quality standards, according to Minnesota officials. Minnesota is the
nation’s leader in the use of renewable fuels, with the highest renewable
fuel use per capita in the nation. It is home to 32 percent of the nation’s
E85 stations.

To reduce a growing dependency on imported fossil fuels, make better use
of the region’s natural renewable resources, and improve air quality
profiles, Texas enacted legislation in 2005 that extended its 1999 RPS to
require the installation of 5,000 megawatts of new renewable capacity, or
about 5 percent of the state’s electricity demand, by 2015. Texas has
already tripled its use of renewable energy in the 7 years since its RPS was
initially enacted.

Texas uses more total energy—including electricity, petroleum, natural
gas, and coal—than any other state. In the early 1990s, Texas’ use of
renewable energy was less than 1 percent, the lowest in the United States.
In 1992, Texas became a net importer of energy. Moreover, if Texas was a
country, it would have ranked 7th in the world for greenhouse gas
emissions in the early 1990s, according to climate change experts at the
Pew Center on Global Climate Change. Despite these conditions, however,
Texas also ranks first in abundance of U.S. solar and biomass resources,
and second for wind resources. To encourage the use of the state’s
abundant renewable resources and improve its environmental profile,
Texas’ 1999 legislation established an RPS mandating that state utilities
derive 2,000 megawatts of new generating capacity from renewable
sources by 2009. When Texas had nearly reached this capacity by 2005,
new legislation increased the mandate to 5,000 new megawatts by 2015.
Electric power retailers that do not comply with RPS requirements are
subject to penalties of up to $50 per megawatt-hour, or 5 cents per
kilowatt-hour, as tracked by a renewable energy credit system. To
encourage a wide variety of renewable developments, the Texas RPS also
requires that 500 megawatts of total mandated new capacity come from
renewable sources other than wind, because wind power is the most
competitive renewable energy technology in Texas—98 percent of new
installed capacity in Texas prior to 1999 was wind power. In addition,
Texas’ RPS set a nonbinding target of 10,000 megawatts of installed
renewable capacity by January 1, 2025.

**Page 64** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

California’s Solar
Programs

**Appendix IV: Three States’ Initiatives to**
**Stimulate the Use of Renewable Energy**
**Technologies**

According to the Electric Reliability Council of Texas, Inc., as of
September 2006, Texas had tripled its renewable energy capacity,
installing over 1,900 megawatts of new capacity, representing about 3
percent of its total electricity consumption. During 2001 alone, Texas
installed 912 megawatts of wind power—more than the entire country had
installed in any previous year—and created 2,500 wind-power related jobs.
Texas’ 2025 goal would result in an estimated $5 billion in consumer
electric bill savings and the creation of nearly 20,000 jobs, according to the
Union of Concerned Scientists.

Since 1998, California has supported the installation of solar systems—
including photovoltaic systems and solar thermal systems—by
establishing production incentives and rebates for solar energy generators
and consumers. These programs are designed to reduce electricity demand
and improve the reliability of the state’s electricity system. In January
2006, California enacted a $2.2 billion Solar Initiative to install 3,000
megawatts of new solar energy by 2017, supporting the governor’s 2006
“Million Solar Roofs Plan” to power 50 percent of all California homes—or
1 million roofs—with solar energy by 2019. As of January 2006, California
had installed over 150 megawatts of new solar systems on over 20,000
homes, businesses, schools, and government buildings, according to
California state officials and a California environmental group.

California established the Emerging Renewables Program in 1998.
Implemented by the California Energy Commission, the program has
encouraged the use of naturally abundant solar resources by allocating
$118 million in rebates from 2002 through 2006 for the installation of new,
primarily residential, renewable energy generating systems. In particular,
for systems less than 30 kilowatts, the program offered $2.60 per watt for
the installation of solar-cell systems and $3.00 per watt for the installation
of solar-thermal systems. The Emerging Renewables Program also
allocated $10 million toward a performance-based incentive option for
photovoltaic installations, giving electricity generators $0.50 per kilowatthour over a 3-year period. In 2001, the California Public Utilities
Commission initiated the Self-Generation Incentive Program, which offers
rebates through 2007 for nonresidential distributed renewable generation
for 30 kilowatt or larger systems. Since its inception, the rebate program
has spent about $50 million per year, achieving 50 megawatts of installed
solar capacity, with another 62 additional megawatts in progress. In 2006,
the Public Utilities Commission introduced the California Solar Initiative,
which will provide $2.9 billion in solar energy incentives over 11 years and
support the governor’s Million Solar Roofs Plan to install 3,000 megawatts

**Page 65** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

**Appendix IV: Three States’ Initiatives to**
**Stimulate the Use of Renewable Energy**
**Technologies**

of new solar energy capacity by 2017. By integrating California’s existing
Emerging Renewables Program and rebate solar programs, the initiative
will continue to encourage new solar installations through rebate
incentives for new photovoltaic and solar thermal systems, and pay-forperformance incentives that reward high-performing solar systems
(greater than 100 kilowatts). To help sustain the solar industry, rebates for
new solar systems will begin at $2.50 per watt, but will decline by about 10
percent annually over the next 10 years. In addition, the initiative sets
aside 10 percent of program funding for low-income and affordable
housing projects.

**Page 66** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

**Appendix V: Comments from the Department**
**of Energy**
#### Appendix V: Comments from the Department of Energy

**Page 67** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

Staff
Acknowledgments

**(360625)**

In addition to the individual named above, Richard Cheston, Assistant
Director; Robert Sanchez, Kerry Lipsitz, Christina Connelly, Chuck
Bausell, MaryLynn Sergent, Anne Stevens, and Alison O’Neill made key
contributions to this report. Also contributing to this report were Doreen
Feldman, Barbara Timmerman, and Jenny Chanley.

**Page 68** **GAO-07-106 DOE's Energy Challenges**

GAO’s Mission The Government Accountability Office, the audit, evaluation and
investigative arm of Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting its
constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and
accountability of the federal government for the American people. GAO
examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and policies;
and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance to help
Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding decisions. GAO’s
commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of
accountability, integrity, and reliability.

Public Affairs

[Paul Anderson, Managing Director, AndersonP1@gao.gov (202) 512-4800](mailto:AndersonP1@gao.gov)
U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7149
Washington, D.C. 20548

**PRINTED ON** **RECYCLED PAPER**